FACTS:
This is a Petition for Review on Certiorari (Petition) filed under Rule 45 of the Rules of Court by petitioners National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP), Zenaida Brigida Hamada-Pawid, Dionesia O. Banua, Conchita C. Calzado, Percy Brawner, Cosme Lambayon, Santos Unsad, and Basilio Wandag (collectively, petitioners) against respondent Macroasia Corporation (Macroasia), seeking to reverse and set aside the Amended Decision dated March 14, 2016 and the Resolution dated August 9, 2016, and to reinstate the Decision dated April 22, 2015, all promulgated by the Court of Appeals (CA) in the case docketed as CA-G.R. SP No. 124632. Macroasia filed a Joint Motion to Render Judgment Based on Compromise Agreement dated February 21, 2023, manifesting that the parties have finally resolved their differences and agreed to amicably settle the subject case, and submitting the Compromise Agreement dated February 1, 2023. Accordingly, Macroasia prayed that the case be declared closed and terminated based on the said Compromise Agreement. In a Manifestation and Motion dated March 30, 2023, the Office of the Solicitor General, on behalf of the NCIP, joined Macroasia in the submission of the Motion to Render Judgment Based on Compromise Agreement. As a result of this Compromise Agreement, all Parties, including their assignors, assignees and/or successors in interests, have agreed to jointly move for the DISMISSAL WITH PREJUDICE of G.R. No. 226176 pending before the Supreme Court; and to consider the said case CLOSED and TERMINATED based on said Compromise Agreement. All Parties further confirm the factual antecedents and manifest that this Compromise Agreement was executed freely and voluntarily with full appreciation of its consequences and that the issues and/or incidents leading to the execution of the same have been referred, discussed, consulted and agreed upon with the assistance of their respective counsels.

ISSUES:

RULINGS:
WHEREFORE, finding the Compromise Agreement to be validly executed and not contrary to law, morals, good customs, public policy, and public order, the Joint Motion to Render Judgment Based on Compromise Agreement is GRANTED and the Compromise Agreement is APPROVED and ADOPTED. The parties are ENJOINED to comply with the terms and conditions of the Compromise Agreement in utmost good faith. ACCORDINGLY, the instant case is deemed CLOSED and TERMINATED.
