FACTS:
Plantersbank was the mortgagee of nineteen (19) parcels of land situated in San Juan, Metro Manila (subject properties), covered by Transfer Certificates of Title (TCT) Nos. 11057-R to 11075-R, under a Mortgage dated February 28, 2003 executed by the borrower-mortgagor, Kwong-on Trading Corporation (KTC), to secure a P14,000,000.00 loan. KTC defaulted in the payment of its loan, constraining Plantersbank to extra­ judicially foreclose the mortgaged properties and, in the process, emerged as the highest bidder in the public auction sale held on May 5, 2010. KTC likewise failed to redeem the subject properties, which led to the cancellation of TCT Nos. 11057-R to 11075-R, and the issuance of TCT Nos. 012-2011000149 to 012-2011000167 in the name of Plantersbank. Thereafter, Plantersbank applied for a writ of possession, which was granted by the RTC in a Decision dated January 6, 2012 (January 6, 2012 Decision). The corresponding writ of possession was issued on February 2, 2012 and served, together with the Notice to Vacate and the January 6, 2012 Decision, to petitioner AQA Global Construction Inc. (AQA), which occupied the subject properties at the time. Plantersbank opposed AQA’s motion, contending that AQA cannot be considered a third party possessing the subject properties adversely against KTC because the latter derived its right from Je-An through a Deed of Assignment of the subject properties dated February 24, 2003 (February 24, 2003 Deed of Assignment) executed by its representative, Antonio Q. Achurra, Jr. (Achurra). Plantersbank further averred that the lease between Je-An and AQA cannot bind it since the same was not registered and annotated on the titles over the subject properties. AQA filed its Reply, maintaining that its right to possess the subject properties did not come from KTC but from Je-An. It further averred that KTC has no right over the subject properties considering the subsequent rescission of the February 24, 2003 Deed of Assignment by Little Giant and KTC.

ISSUES:
The essential issue for the Court’s resolution is whether or not the CA erred in finding that the RTC gravely abused its discretion in staying the implementation of the writ of possession against AQA and Je-An.

RULINGS:
After hearing AQA’s motion, the RTC issued an Order dated July 16, 2012 excluding AQA and Je-An from the implementation of the writ of possession in favor of Plantersbank, ruling that they are third parties which did not derive title from KTC. It held that Plantersbank’s proper recourse is to file a separate action questioning their possession. Dissatisfied, Plantersbank moved for reconsideration which was, however, denied in an Order dated September 25, 2012. It then elevated the matter to the CA through a petition for certiorari under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court (Rules). Undaunted, AQA and Je-An separately moved for reconsideration which were, however, denied in a Resolution dated March 10, 2014; hence, the instant petitions. The petition lacks merit. The general rule is that after the lapse of the redemption period, the purchaser in a foreclosure sale becomes the absolute owner of the property purchased who is entitled to the possession of the said property. Upon ex parte petition, it is ministerial upon the trial court to issue the writ of possession in his favor. The exception, however, is provided under Section 33, Rule 39 of the Rules, which applies suppletorily to extrajudicial foreclosures of real estate mortgages. Under the said provision of law, the possession of the mortgaged property may be awarded to a purchaser in the extrajudicial foreclosure unless a third party is actually holding the property adversely to the judgment debtor: Upon the expiration of the right of redemption, the purchaser or redemptioner shall be substituted to and acquire all the rights, title, interest and claim of the judgment obligor to the property as of the time of the levy. The possession of the property shall be given to the purchaser or last redemptioner by the same officer unless a third party is actually holding the property adversely to the judgment obligor. (Emphasis supplied) Thus, where a parcel of land levied upon on execution is occupied by a party other than a judgment debtor, the procedure is for the court to order a hearing to determine the nature of said adverse possession. For the exception to apply, however, the property need not only be possessed by a third party, but also held by him adversely to the judgment obligor – such as that of a co-owner, agricultural tenant or usufructuary, who possess the property in their own right and not merely the successor or transferee of the right of possession of, or privy to, the judgment obligor. Clearly, the stay of the implementation of the writ of possession prayed for by Je-An on the basis of such inchoate right would becloud the integrity and derogate the indefeasibility of the torrens title issued in favor of Plantersbank as a confirmed owner, which the Court cannot allow. Corollorily, the enforcement of the writ of possession cannot also be stayed in favor of AQA which merely derived its possession from Je-An through an unregistered contract of lease. The Court simply cannot subscribe to AQA’s claim that its status as a tenant renders its possession adverse to that of Plantersbank, in consonance with the ruling in China Bank v. Spouses Lozada. In the said case, the “tenant” contemplated clearly refers to an “agricultural tenant” who: (a) possesses the property in his own right; and (b) is protected by Presidential Decree (PO) No. 1038 wherein a tenant­tiller of private agricultural lands devoted to crops other than rice and/or com shall not be removed, ejected, ousted or excluded from his farmholding unless directed by a final decision or order of the court for causes provided by law, which does not include sale of the land – and not to a “civil law tenant.” Consequently, Je-An and AQA cannot be considered third parties holding the subject properties adversely to KTC, the defaulting debtor­ mortgagor. Resultantly, the general rule, and not the exception, applies to the instant petitions, rendering it the mandatory and ministerial duty of the RTC to issue the writ of possession in favor of Plantersbank as the confirmed owner, and of the Sheriff to implement the said writ. As this Court ruled in St. Dominic Corp. v. Intermediate Appellate Court: Nonetheless, the Court would like to take exception to the CA’s ruling, limiting the remedies of the adverse third party to vindicate his claim of ownership and/or possession over the foreclosed property to a terceria and an independent separate action once a writ of possession had already been issued, as in this case. In Gagoomal v. Spouses Villacorta, the Court ruled that aside from such remedies, the adverse third party may take other legal remedies to prosecute his claim, such as invoking the supervisory power of the RTC to enjoin the enforcement/implementation of the writ of possession, as what petitioners did in this case. Unquestionably, the RTC has a general supervisory control over the entire execution process, and such authority carries with it the right to determine every question which may be invariably involved in the execution, and ensure that it is enforcing its judgment only against properties irrefutably belonging to the judgment debtor. However, in such instances, the RTC does not and cannot pass upon the question of title to the property, with any character of finality, and can treat of the matter only as may be necessary to decide the question of whether or not the person in possession holds the property adversely to the judgment obligor. If the claimant’s proofs do not persuade the court of the validity of his title or right of possession thereto, the claim will be denied.