FACTS:
Respondent Domingo Alibin (Domingo) owned an undivided one-half  portion of Lot No. 1680 (subject lot). Registered in his name and that of Mariano Rodrigueza (Mariano) under Original Certificate of Title (OCT) No. 0-206. On the strength of a contract to sell which was notarized on July 10, 1962 and a Deed of Sale dated August 23, 1962 purporting to convey Domingo’s one-half (½) share of the said lot to Caridad Rodrigueza (Caridad), as well as a Deed of Absolute Sale dated December 5, 1994 whereby Mariano and Caridad (the Rodriguezas) transferred their respective rights to the subject lot in favor of petitioner Krystle Realty Development Corporation (Krystle Realty), the original certificate of title was cancelled.  In lieu thereof, three (3) TCTs were issued all on the same day of December 5, 1994, as follows: TCT Nos. 40467 and 40468 in the names of the Rodriguezas at one-half (½) share each, and TCT No. 40469 in the name of Krystle Realty covering the entire lot. Claiming that he had not sold his share to Caridad nor received any consideration for the alleged transfer, and that the signature on the deed of sale was not his, Domingo sought to annul the said deed, as well as TCT Nos. 40467, 40468, and 40469

ISSUES:
Whether or not the CA correctly affirmed the nullification of the Deed of Sale dated August 23, 1962 and the declaration of Krystle Realty as a purchaser in bad faith.

RULINGS:
Assailed in these consolidated petitions for review on certiorari are the Decision and the Resolution of the Court of Appeals (CA) which affirmed the Decision of the Regional Trial Court (RTC) of Legazpi City, for the annulment of the Deed of Sale executed in favor of petitioner Caridad Rodrigueza, and of Transfer Certificates of Title (TCT) Nos. 40467, 40468 and 40469 issued by the Registry of Deeds of Legazpi City. The RTC rendered a Decision (a) annulling the Deed of Sale dated August 23, 1962; (b) declaring respondents as the rightful owners of the one-half (½) undivided portion of the subject lot, and Krystle Realty as to the remaining one-half (½) portion; (c) ordering the cancellation of TCT Nos. 40467, 40468, and 40469 and, in lieu thereof, the issuance of new TCTs in the names of respondents and of Krystle Realty; (d) dismissing the counterclaims against respondents; and (e) awarding attorney’s fees and costs of suit in favor of respondents. The CA affirmed the findings of the RTC on the ground that respondents were able to establish that the Deed of Sale dated August 23, 1962 was not valid and, hence, should be annulled. It further held that the transactions involving the sale of Domingo’s one-half (½) undivided share were “anomalous,” and Krystle Realty was “not a purchaser in good faith.” Motions for reconsideration were subsequently filed by Caridad and Krystle Realty which were, however, denied by the CA. The authenticity of a signature is a matter that is not so highly technical as to preclude a judge from examining the signature himself and ruling upon the question of whether the signature on a document is forged or not. The opinion of a handwriting expert, therefore, does not mandatorily bind the court, the expert's function being to place before the court data upon which it can form its own opinion. Both the RTC and the CA conducted independent examinations of the specimen signatures and unanimously concluded that the questioned signature on the Deed of Sale dated August 23, 1962 is different from the standard signatures of Domingo as appearing on documents submitted in evidence by petitioner. On Krystle Realty’s claim that it is a buyer in good faith, the Court finds that the latter cannot veer away from the admission of its representative, Mr. William Cu, i.e., that he was aware of Domingo’s interest in the subject lot, and that Caridad had no title in her name at the time of the sale. Records show that Krystle Realty proceeded with the transaction without further examining the seller’s title and thus, could not claim to have purchased the subject lot in good faith. One is considered a buyer in bad faith not only when he purchases real estate with knowledge of a defect or lack of title in his seller but also when he has knowledge of facts which should have alerted him to conduct further inquiry or investigation. As one asserting the status of a buyer in good faith and for value, it had the burden of proving such status. WHEREFORE, the consolidated petitions are DENIED. Accordingly, the Decision dated October 29, 2010 and the Resolution dated March 11, 2011 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CV No. 92765 are hereby AFFIRMED.