FACTS:
On the issue of estoppel and laches raised by Krystle Realty the CA ruled that since Domingo neither consented to the alleged sale nor signed the purported Deed of Sale dated August 23 1962 in favor of Caridad there was no contract to speak of and the action to declare its inexistence does not prescribe pursuant to Article 1410 of the Civil Code. The Issue Before the Court The pivotal issue in this case is whether or not the CA correctly affirmed the nullification of the Deed of Sale dated August 23 1962 and the declaration of Krystle Realty as a purchaser in bad faith. The Court Ruling Contrary to the contention of petitioners the CA has not overlooked any relevant fact which if properly considered would justify a different conclusion. That the parties herein agreed to submit the determination of the genuineness of Domingo signature to a handwriting expert of the NBI does not by any stretch of the imagination authorize the RTC to accept the findings of such expert hook line and sinker. The trial court is the most capable trier of facts and as such should not abdicate its judicial duty to decide. As correctly pointed out by the CA the authenticity of a signature is a matter that is not so highly technical as to preclude a judge from examining the signature himself and ruling upon the question of whether the signature on a document is forged or not. The opinion of a handwriting expert therefore does not mandatorily bind the court the expert function being to place before the court data upon which it can form its own opinion.

ISSUES:
The CA Ruling

RULINGS:
Respondent Domingo Alibin Domingo owned an undivided one-half portion of Lot No. 1680 subject lot containing an aggregate area of 9 188 square meters situated at Tahao Legazpi City Albay and registered in his name and that of Mariano Rodrigueza Mariano under Original Certificate of Title OCT No. 0-206. On the strength of a contract to sell which was notarized on July 10 1962 and a Deed of Sale dated August 23 1962 purporting to convey Domingo one-half ½ share of the said lot to Caridad Rodrigueza Caridad as well as a Deed of Absolute Sale dated December 5 1994 whereby Mariano and Caridad the Rodriguezas transferred their respective rights to the subject lot in favor of petitioner Krystle Realty Development Corporation Krystle Realty the original certificate of title was cancelled. In lieu thereof three 3 TCTs were issued all on the same day of December 5 1994 as follows: TCT Nos. 40467 and 40468 in the names of the Rodriguezas at one-half ½ share each and TCT No. 40469 in the name of Krystle Realty covering the entire lot. Claiming that he had not sold his share to Caridad nor received any consideration for the alleged transfer and that the signature on the deed of sale was not his Domingo sought to annul the said deed as well as TCT Nos. 40467 40468 and 40469 in Civil Case No. 9033 before the RTC of Legazpi City Branch He died however during the pendency of the case and was consequently substituted by his heirs herein respondents Beatriz Torzar Virginia Taraya Rosario Marco Jesus Alibin and Jay Alibin as substituted by his children namely: Jaynes Alibin Jay Alibin and Jesus Alibin Jr. respondents . Caridad on the other hand insisted that she had paid Domingo in two 2 installments: P500.00 as down payment on July 10 1962 and the balance of P400.00 on August 23 1962 during which he signed the Deed of Sale. She then took possession of Domingo one-half ½ portion of the subject lot and declared the same for taxation purposes. For its part Krystle Realty claimed that it was a purchaser in good faith and that the action if at all should be directed against Caridad. In addition it argued that the action of respondents had already prescribed considering that the questioned deed of sale between Caridad and Domingo was executed on August 23 1962 whereas the latter complaint was filed only on February 15 1995. Caridad likewise died and was substituted first by her brother Mariano and upon the latter death by Rufino Rodrigueza. The parties agreed to submit to a handwriting expert of the National Bureau of Investigation NBI the determination of the genuineness of Domingo signature on the deed of sale. Subsequently the NBI issued Questioned Document Report No. 60-196 dated June 14 1996 stating that the questioned and the standard/sample signatures of Domingo submitted to it for examination were written by one and the same person. On the basis of the said finding and upon motion of Krystle Realty the RTC of Legazpi City Branch 4 rendered a Judgment on October 2 1996 dismissing the case which prompted Domingo to file a petition for certiorari before the Court docketed as No. 127995. The petition was dismissed however in a Resolution dated April 28 1997 for non-compliance with certain formal requirements for its filing. Meanwhile Domingo appeal docketed as CA-CV No. 54912 from the aforesaid judgment of the RTC proceeded and was decided in his favor by the CA in a Decision dated June 22 1998 which set aside and remanded the case to the court a quo for further proceedings. The CA ruled that even if the question of forgery was to be considered as already settled there are other issues of fact and law that should still be resolved such as the absence of consideration in the questioned sale the supposed irregularities which attended the execution of the deed of sale and the legality of the issuance of the certificates of title. Hence the judgment of the RTC which could have only been rendered in the absence of a veritable issue on a material fact was improper under the circumstances. After due trial the RTC of Legazpi City Branch 7 rendered a Decision on November 18 2008 a annulling the Deed of Sale dated August 23 1962; b declaring respondents as the rightful owners of the one-half ½ undivided portion of the subject lot and Krystle Realty as to the remaining one-half ½ portion; c ordering the cancellation of TCT Nos. 40467 40468 and 40469 and in lieu thereof the issuance of new TCTs in the names of respondents and of Krystle Realty; d dismissing the counterclaims against respondents; and e awarding attorney fees and costs of suit in favor of respondents. Aggrieved Krystle Realty and Caridad elevated their cases on appeal before the CA docketed as CA-CV No. 92765. Motions for reconsideration were subsequently filed by Caridad and Krystle Realty which were however denied by the CA in a Resolution dated March 11 2011 for lack of merit. Accordingly Krystle Realty instituted the present petition in No. 196117 and Caridad as substituted by Rufino Rodrigueza the petition in No. 196129 both of which were eventually consolidated. The Court likewise rejects the belated claim of res judicata anchored on the dismissal of the petition for certiorari in No. 127995 filed by Domingo as per its Resolution dated April 28 1997 which became final and executory on June 16 1997. As the records disclose petitioners never raised this issue in the appeal in CA-CV No. 54912 before the CA and even in the subsequent proceedings before the RTC and the CA in CA-CV No. 92765. Settled is the rule that points of law theories issues and arguments not brought to the attention of the lower court need not be considered by a reviewing court as they cannot be raised for the first time at that late stage. Basic considerations of fairness and due process impel this rule.