FACTS:
Claiming that he had not sold his share to Caridad nor received any consideration for the alleged transfer, and that the signature on the deed of sale was not his, Domingo sought to annul the said deed, as well as TCT Nos. 40467, 40468, and 40469, in Civil Case No. 9033 before the RTC of Legazpi City, Branch 4.  He died, however, during the pendency of the case, and was consequently substituted by his heirs, herein respondents Beatriz A. Torzar, Virginia A. Taraya, Rosario A. Marco, Jesus A. Alibin, and Jay Alibin, as substituted by his children, namely: Jaynes Alibin, Jay Alibin, and Jesus Alibin, Jr. (respondents). Caridad likewise died, and was substituted first by her brother, Mariano, and upon the latter’s death, by Rufino Rodrigueza. The parties agreed to submit to a handwriting expert of the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) the determination of the genuineness of Domingo’s signature on the deed of sale. Subsequently, the NBI issued Questioned Document Report No. 60-196 dated June 14, 1996 stating that the questioned and the standard/sample signatures of Domingo submitted to it for examination were written by one and the same person. On the basis of the said finding, and upon motion of Krystle Realty, the RTC of Legazpi City, Branch 4 rendered a Judgment on October 2, 1996 dismissing the case, which prompted Domingo to file a petition for certiorari before the Court, docketed as G.R. No. 127995.  The petition was dismissed, however, in a Resolution dated April 28, 1997 for non-compliance with certain formal requirements for its filing.  Meanwhile, Domingo’s appeal, docketed as CA-G.R. CV No. 54912, from the aforesaid judgment of the RTC proceeded, and was decided in his favor by the CA in a Decision dated June 22, 1998, which set aside and remanded the case to the court a quo for further proceedings. The CA ruled that, even if the question of forgery was to be considered as already settled, there are other issues of fact and law that should still be resolved, such as the absence of consideration in the questioned sale, the supposed irregularities which attended the execution of the deed of sale, and the legality of the issuance of the certificates of title.  Hence, the judgment of the RTC, which could have only been rendered in the absence of a veritable issue on a material fact, was improper under the circumstances.

ISSUES:
The pivotal issue in this case is whether or not the CA correctly affirmed the nullification of the Deed of Sale dated August 23, 1962 and the declaration of Krystle Realty as a purchaser in bad faith.

RULINGS:
Assailed in these consolidated petitions for review on certiorari are the Decision dated October 29, 2010 and the Resolution dated March 11, 2011 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CV No. 92765 which affirmed the Decision dated November 18, 2008 of the Regional Trial Court (RTC) of Legazpi City, Branch 7 in Civil Case No. 9033 for the annulment of the Deed of Sale dated August 23, 1962 executed in favor of petitioner Caridad Rodrigueza, and of Transfer Certificates of Title (TCT) Nos. 40467, 40468 and 40469 issued by the Registry of Deeds of Legazpi City. Aggrieved, Krystle Realty and Caridad elevated their cases on appeal before the CA, docketed as CA-G.R. CV No. 92765. Motions for reconsideration were subsequently filed by Caridad and Krystle Realty which were, however, denied by the CA in a Resolution dated March 11, 2011 for lack of merit. Accordingly, Krystle Realty instituted the present petition in G.R. No. 196117, and Caridad, as substituted by Rufino Rodrigueza, the petition in G.R. No. 196129, both of which were eventually consolidated. It is a settled rule that the Court is not a trier of facts and, hence, does not normally undertake the re-examination of the evidence presented by the contending parties during the trial of the case, considering that the factual findings of the CA are generally conclusive and binding on the Court, especially if they do not contradict those of the trial court, as in this case. Contrary to the contention of petitioners, the CA has not overlooked any relevant fact which, if properly considered, would justify a different conclusion. That the parties herein agreed to submit the determination of the genuineness of Domingo’s signature to a handwriting expert of the NBI does not, by any stretch of the imagination, authorize the RTC to accept the findings of such expert hook, line, and sinker. The trial court is the most capable trier of facts and, as such, should not abdicate its judicial duty to decide. As correctly pointed out by the CA, the authenticity of a signature is a matter that is not so highly technical as to preclude a judge from examining the signature himself and ruling upon the question of whether the signature on a document is forged or not. The opinion of a handwriting expert, therefore, does not mandatorily bind the court, the expert’s function being to place before the court data upon which it can form its own opinion. In this case, both the RTC and the CA conducted independent examinations of the specimen signatures, which is authorized by law, and unanimously concluded that the questioned signature on the Deed of Sale dated August 23, 1962 is different from the standard signatures of Domingo as appearing on documents submitted in evidence by petitioner Caridad Rodrigueza. Absent any cogent reason to deviate from such finding of forgery, which is the basis for the annulment of the said deed, the same should be deemed conclusive and binding upon the Court. The Court likewise rejects the belated claim of res judicata anchored on the dismissal of the petition for certiorari in G.R. No. 127995 filed by Domingo as per its Resolution dated April 28, 1997, which became final and executory on June 16, 1997. As the records disclose, petitioners never raised this issue in the appeal in CA-G.R. CV No. 54912 before the CA, and even in the subsequent proceedings before the RTC and the CA in CA-G.R. CV No. 92765. Settled is the rule that points of law, theories, issues and arguments not brought to the attention of the lower court need not be considered by a reviewing court, as they cannot be raised for the first time at that late stage. Basic considerations of fairness and due process impel this rule. WHEREFORE, the consolidated petitions are DENIED. Accordingly, the Decision dated October 29, 2010 and the Resolution dated March 11, 2011 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CV No. 92765 are hereby AFFIRMED.