FACTS: 
Sandiganbayan finding Isagani Laurence de Guzman Nicolas (Isagani) and Leonardo Rosario Nicolas, Jr. (Leonardo) guilty beyond reasonable doubt of the crime of direct bribery, defined and penalized under Article 210 of the Revised Penal Code. Geraldine Ubana-Baniqued (Baniqued), provincial legal officer of Pangasinan, averred that around the second week of May 2017, Leonardo, using the mobile phone number 09209474974, called her up and introduced himself as Atty. Leonardo Nicolas, an employee of the Office of the Ombudsman. Leonardo told her that he got her number from a fellow lawyer from Pangasinan and that he knows her connection to the Espino family given her position in the local government unit. He informed her that the Office of the Ombudsman received a complaint against Mayor Jumel Anthony I. Espino (Mayor Espino), and as a resident of Pangasinan, he became concerned and wanted to help. If the mayor would cooperate, he could facilitate the dismissal of the said case. When Baniqued relayed the matter to Mayor Espino, the latter was already aware of the complaint and told her that the municipality’s problem with the Commission on Audit concerning the construction of a medical facility had been resolved and remedial measures were being undertaken to comply with the standards set by the Commission on Audit and the Department of Health. Baniqued relayed this information to Leonardo when he called her again. The information, however, did not deter Leonardo. He said that the matter should be taken seriously as it could lead to preventive suspension and insisted that they meet so he could show her a copy of the complaint as well as the documents from the Office of the Ombudsman recommending for the preventive suspension of Mayor Espino for six months. Leonardo even bragged that the said documents would have already been released had it not been for his timely intervention. When Mayor Espino heard about this, he agreed to see the documents mentioned by Leonardo. Thus, Baniqued agreed to meet with the latter. At around 12:00 p.m. of May 26, 2017, Baniqued met with Leonardo at Consuelo’s Restaurant in Lingayen, Pangasinan. Upon the instruction of Mayor Espino, she was accompanied by Municipal Administrator Amado Aquino and a policeman whom she simply knew as “Tuazon.” During the meeting, Leonardo reiterated his offer to help Mayor Espino. He showed Baniqued several documents, one of which was an “Evaluation Report.” After much prodding, Leonardo allowed her to take a picture of some of the documents to show the mayor. When asked how he could help the mayor, Leonardo answered that they could settle the case by providing PHP 150,000.00 to PHP 250,000.00 per allegation, or a total of at least PHP 1,350,000.00. In its Decision, the Sandiganbayan found Leonardo and Isagani guilty of direct bribery and were sentenced to suffer the indeterminate penalty of imprisonment of two years and four months of prision correccional in its minimum period, as minimum, to four years and two months of prision correccional in its medium period, as maximum, and to pay a fine of PHP 6 million each with subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency, and special temporary disqualification from holding public office. 

ISSUES:
The sole issue for this Court’s resolution is whether the Sandiganbayan correctly convicted Leonardo and Isagani of the crime of direct bribery under the Revised Penal Code. 

RULINGS:
This Court affirms the conviction of Leonardo, but acquits Isagani of the crime charged.  To sustain a conviction for the crime of direct bribery, the following essential elements must be proved: (a) the offender is a public officer; (b) the offender accepts an offer or promise, or receives a gift or present, directly or through another; (c) such offer or promise was accepted, or gift or present was received, by the public officer, as a consideration for committing some crime, or executing an act which does not constitute a crime but the act must be unjust; or refraining from doing something which is his official duty to do; and (d) the crime or act which the offender agrees to perform or execute relates to the exercise of his functions as a public officer.  A circumspect review of the records of this case would reveal that all elements of the crime of direct bribery had been proven beyond reasonable doubt insofar as Leonardo is concerned. Leonardo is a public officer. There is no dispute that Leonardo is a public officer, having admitted that he was an Associate Graft Investigation Officer III of the Field Investigation Office of the Office of the Ombudsman at the time material to this case. Leonardo personally receive d the PHP 3 million bribe money. The prosecution evidence clearly established that Leonardo personally received the PHP 3 million boodle money, the amount he demanded from the Espinos, through the latter’s intermediary, on July 21, 2017 in a valid entrapment operation by the National Bureau of Investigation. Records show that when Leonardo received an anonymous complaint against Mayor Espino sometime in May 2017, he lost no time in looking for a connection to the mayor. He managed to get the contact number of Baniqued, a confidant of the Espinos, through a group of lawyers from Pangasinan. During a phone call to Baniqued sometime in May 2017, Leonardo intimated that the mayor had a pending complaint with the Office of the Ombudsman and that he can help get it dismissed. Leonardo continued pressuring Baniqued to persuade the mayor to agree to his offer. Due to his persistence and upon the instruction of Mayor Espino, Baniqued met with Leonardo at Consuelo’s Restaurant on May 26, 2017. During the said meeting, Leonardo repeated his offer to help facilitate the dismissal of the said complaint, but at the same time demanded money in exchange for his assistance. To convince her that a complaint was really filed against the mayor, Leonardo showed to her a document dated May 9, 2017 which recommended that the complaint be formally docketed, investigation commenced, and the mayor preventively suspended. The prosecution evidence likewise proved that Leonardo persistently demanded money in return for his assistance to get the complaints against the Espinos dismissed. Indeed, his demeanor and actuations in these meetings lead the Court to believe of his knowing participation in the crime charged. First. As he himself admitted, his initial reaction to accused Leonardo’s request to be introduced to the Espinos was to advise him to refrain or inhibit as it may create a doubt on accused Leonardo’s integrity. This only shows that as early as May 27, 2017, accused Isagani was already keenly aware of the impropriety of the meeting being requested by accused Leonardo. Despite this, he still proceeded to introduce Leonardo to Soriano and attended both the July 14 and 21, 2017 meetings. Second. During the July 14, 2017 meeting, after introducing accused Leonardo and Soriano, he told accused Leonardo: “O kayo na ang bahala dyan. Basta ako dito lang ako. Ikaw na bahala magpaliwanag kung ano yan.”  Third. During the meeting at the Capitol Resort Hotel on July 21, 2017, after Baniqued told the waiter in jest: “do you have cash instead?” Accused Isagani said: “we should ask from Mr. Soriano.” Accused Isagani’s claims of ignorance and non-participation in the subject matter of the July 14 and 21, 2017 meetings are plainly unconvincing. Indeed, the evidence on record shows that he is no mere simpleton. His intelligence is borne out by his membership in the bar and occupation as a labor arbiter. He was undoubtedly aware of all that was being discussed and the consequences of his actions. As to his alibi, granting that he originally had a different engagement on July 21, 2017, he still chose to attend the meeting with accused Leonardo at Capitol Resort Hotel. In fact, he requested the TAPI officials for a change of venue of his previously scheduled meeting with them. Instead of the original venue, he asked them to meet him at the said hotel. Rather than exculpating accused Isagani, the Court finds that this only evinced his prioritization of, and commitment to, the meeting with accused Leonardo. The overt acts of Isagani before, during and after the commission of the crime shows no indication that he acted in unison with Leonardo. One. This Court cannot simply brush aside the fact that part of the reason why Isagani was present during the July 14,2017 meeting was not only due to the insistence of Leonardo, but also because he was requested by Representative Espino to be present on such meeting for the purpose of introducing Leonardo to Soriano. There is also nothing in the records which shows that Isagani personally and actively sought out either Leonardo, in order to cook up with him a scheme to extort money from the Espinos, or the Espinos, for the purpose of getting money from them in return for a favor or assistance on any matter, prior to being approached by either Leonardo or Representative Espino. Even after the individual requests of Leonardo and Representative Espino for introduction, and despite his knowledge of the purpose of the meeting requested, there is still absence of evidence that Isagani actively participated in extorting money from the Espinos. On the contrary, the pieces of evidence proffered by the prosecution point to Leonardo and no other as the person solely responsible for demanding bribe in exchange for his efforts in helping get the complaints against the Espinos dismissed. The testimony of Baniqued evinces that only Leonardo contacted her and persistently pressured her to convince the Espinos to accept his offer for help. The testimony of Soriano likewise shows that it was Leonardo who demanded PHP 3 million for the dismissal of the said complaints during the July 14, 2017 meeting, and only he kept on following up on his demand for bribe money. Isagani’s statement after he introduced Leonardo to Soriano during the July 14, 2017 meeting, “O, kayo na’ng bahala dyan. Basta ako dito lang ako. Ikaw na bahala magpaliwanag kung ano yan,” does not at all confirm his involvement in the crime charged in light of the fact that Soriano himself testified that after Isagani introduced him to Leonardo in said meeting, Isagani no longer called him or sent him any text messages. If at all, his statement proves that his presence in the meeting was limited to getting the two acquainted with each other. Two. While Isagani had no more business attending the July 21, 2017 meeting since he had already introduced Leonardo and Soriano to each other during the July 14, 2017 meeting, his presence and prioritization of the July 21, 2017 meeting over his meeting with the Teachers Association of the Philippines Inc. officers is not sufficient to conclude that he is acting in concert with Leonardo in demanding and receiving bribe money from the Espinos. “Mere presence at the scene of the crime at the time of its commission is not, by itself, sufficient to establish conspiracy. To establish conspiracy, evidence of actual cooperation rather than mere cognizance or approval of an illegal act is required.” Here, there is a dearth of evidence that Isagani actually cooperated in the commission of the crime charged. In fact, Soriano admitted that the July 21, 2017 meeting was supposed to be only between him and Leonardo, and it was he who arranged the same. Isagani’s answer, “maybe we should ask Mr. Art Soriano for cash” to Baniqued’s question, “do you have cash instead?” which was directed at the waiter who were taking their order when they were already inside the function room during the July 21, 2017 meeting cannot be reasonably taken as referring to the bribe money that will be exchanged for the evaluation report, considering that Baniqued was, all along, just bantering with Isagani. For better understanding of the context of the exchanges, the pertinent portions of her testimony on this matter are reproduced below: Three. Even the account of Representative Espino as to the involvement of Isagani in the bribery does not firmly establish his complicity thereto. Representative Espino’s assertion that Isagani also demanded PHP 3 million from him and warned him of Mayor Espino’s impending suspension if they do not pay up crumbles under cross examination. His testimony below shows that when Isagani mentioned the PHP 3 million demand, as well as the mayor’s possible suspension from office, it was not of Isagani’s own accord, but it was the product of his inquiry from Leonardo about what can be done about the cases against the Espinos at the behest of no less than the representative: Moreover, Representative Espino’s testimony reveals that he merely ventured in guesswork in concluding that Isagani participated in the crime charged. The Appeal of accused-appellant Isagani Laurence de Guzman Nicolas is GRANTED. The assailed Decision dated May 24, 2019 and the Resolution dated August 13, 2019 of the Sandiganbayan in SB-17-CRM-1509 are AFFIRMED with MODIFICATION as follows: (1) Accused-appellant Leonardo Rosario Nicolas, Jr. is hereby found GUILTY beyond reasonable doubt of the crime of direct bribery defined and penalized under Article 210 of the Revised Penal Code. He is sentenced to suffer the penalty of two (2) years, eleven (11) months and ten (10) days of prision correccional medium in its minimum period, as minimum, to three (3) years, six (6) months and twenty (20) days of prision correccional medium in its medium period, as maximum; and is ORDERED to PAY a fine of PHP 6 million, with subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency, and special temporary disqualification from holding public office; and(2) Accused-appellant Isagani Laurence de Guzman Nicolas is hereby ACQUITTED of the crime charged against him for failure of the prosecution to prove his guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
