FACTS:
Complainant Celia Mendoza is an heir of  Adela Barlaan who died intestate and without ascendant or descendant but with siblings.  The subject real property is with an ara of 274 meter situated in Makati On October 25, 2013, Gemma S. Barlaan, wife of the late Felimon Gundran Barlaan, and their children, namely: Ma. Theresa Barlaan, Michael Robert Barlaan, Fheljohn Barlaan, Jonathan Barlaan, and John Alexander Barlaan, executed an Extrajudicial Settlement with Waiver and Transfer of Rights, the property went to John Alexander Barlaan. On March 12, 2015, John Alexander Barlaan  sold  147 sq meter of the mentioned property to Monette Abac for the amount of  3,130,000php which was notarized and recorded in the notarial books of respondent Atty.  . CESAR R. SANTIAGO, JR.,  Later, in a second deed of sale covering the same 147 sq meter property  in the amount of 1,500,000 was notarized and recorded in the notarial books of respondent Atty.  . CESAR R. SANTIAGO, JR. To avoid payment of the proper taxes. May 15, 2015, Abac move for ejectment against the occupant of the property which she bought for 3,130,000php.  MCTC ruled in her favor On July 2016, complainant filed a disbarment case against Atty. Santiago for notarizing the said Deed of Absolute Sale in violation of the related provision of the Code of Professional Responsibility  (CPR). IBP after its investigation  found Atty. Santiago in violation of the CPR, he knowingly  notarized an instrument knowing that it was done to avoid payment of the proper taxes owed to the government.

ISSUES:
Whether of not Atty. Santiago violated the provision of the Code of Professional Responsibility.  

RULINGS:
Yes.  CANON 1 — A LAWYER SHALL UPHOLD THE CONSTITUTION, OBEY THE LAWS OF THE LAND AND PROMOTE RESPECT FOR LAW OF AND LEGAL PROCESSES. Rule 1.02 — A lawyer shall not counsel or abet activities aimed at defiance of the law or at lessening confidence in the legal system.  Here, Atty. Santiago base on the facts knowingly and deliverately notarized the said instrument which  is designed to greatly prejudice the government of the proper tax.  This was done in brazen disregards of the above quoted canon of the CPR.