FACTS:
In the 2022 elections, four candidates, namely, Roberto “Pinpin” T. Uy, Jr. (Roberto), Romeo “Kuya Jonjon” M. Jalosjos, Jr. (Romeo), Frederico “Kuya Jan” P. Jalosjos (Frederico), and Richard Amazon, vied for the position of Zamboanga del Norte’s first district representative. On November 16, 2021, Romeo filed a Verified Petition to declare Frederico a nuisance candidate and to cancel his CoC before the Commission on Elections (Comelec) docketed as SPA No. 21-224 (DC). Romeo alleged that Frederico has no bona fide intention to run for public office. Frederico indicated “Jalosjos” as his surname in his application for late registration of birth on April 26, 2021, and transferred his voter registration record only on May 20, 2021. Moreover, Frederico was not known as “Kuya Jan” which is confusingly like Romeo’s nickname “Kuya Jonjon.” Lastly, Frederico has no prior political experience. On the other hand, Frederico countered that he has a bona fide intention to run for public office given his government platforms. Frederico was the official candidate of the National Unity Party (NUP). Frederico likewise incurred expenses for his candidacy and extended aid to people affected during the pandemic which are ample proof of his financial capacity to wage a campaign. In a Resolution dated April 19, 2022, the Comelec Second Division declared Frederico a nuisance candidate. The Comelec explained that a candidate intending to win the elections would take steps to distinguish themselves from the other candidates. Any similarity in the names would produce the opposite effect and dilute the candidate’s voter base. Here, the nicknames “Kuya Jonjon” and “Kuya Jan” are phonetically identical. Frederico’s membership in a political party also does not automatically equate to a bona fide intention to run for public office. Frederico sought reconsideration. Meantime, the elections were held on May 9, 2022. The following day, Romeo filed a Motion in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) asking to suspend the proclamation of the leading candidate Roberto based on the partial and unofficial results. Romeo asserted that he won the elections since the votes of Frederico must be credited to him. On May 11, 2022, the Provincial Board of Canvassers (PBOC) reported the final election results. Thereafter, the PBOC received through electronic mail an “advanced copy” of the Comelec En Banc Order in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) directing to suspend Roberto’s proclamation. Immediately, Roberto’s counsel pointed out that the Order was undated and does not contain the complete signatures of the members, a certification, and a notice signed by the Comelec’s Clerk of Court. In due course, the majority of PBOC members ruled that the “advanced copy” of the Order was irregular. However, the PBOC Chairperson dissented and called for a ten-minute recess. Meanwhile, the Comelec Chairperson confirmed the authenticity of the Order through a phone call. On May 12, 2022, at 2:05 a.m., the PBOC resolved to suspend Roberto’s proclamation. On the same day, the Comelec En Banc suspended Roberto’s proclamation. Yet, the Comelec was not unanimous. The dissenting members noted that Roberto’s right to due process was violated because he is not a party in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) and that the rules on suspension of proclamation is inapplicable in a proceeding to declare a nuisance candidate. Aggrieved, Roberto filed before the Comelec an Extremely Urgent Petition to direct the PBOC to proclaim him as the winning candidate having received the highest number of votes based on the complete transmission of election results. Roberto likewise filed a Special Entry of Appearance with Extremely Urgent Motion for Reconsideration Ad Cautelam in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) solely to lift the Order suspending his proclamation.Subsequently, Roberto withdrew the Petition and the entry of special appearance with Motion for Reconsideration. On May 31, 2022, Roberto filed a Petition for Certiorari, Prohibition, and Mandamus Ex Abudanti Ad Cautela before this Court docketed as G.R. No. 260650. Roberto questioned the suspension of his proclamation based on the “advanced copy” of the Comelec En Banc Order in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) where he-is not even a party. Roberto added that PBOC has the ministerial duty to proclaim the candidate with the highest votes. Roberto prayed for a Temporary Restraining Order against the Comelec Order dated May 12, 2022, and a mandatory injunction for the PBOC to reconvene and proclaim him as the winning candidate. In a Resolution elated June 7, 2022, the Comelec En Banc denied Frederico’s Motion for Reconsideration in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) because it was filed a day late. The Comelec noted that the Motion was sent through electronic mail beyond 5:00 p.m. on April 25, 2022, and is deemed filed the following day. At any rate, the Comelec affirmed the finding that Frederico is a nuisance candidate. The Comelec then directed that the votes of Frederico be credited to Romeo pursuant to the ruling in Dela Cruz v. Comelec that the votes received by a nuisance candidate should be credited to the legitimate candidate with the same surname. Dissatisfied, Frederico filed a Petition for Certiorari before this Court docketed as G.R. No. 260952. Frederico assailed the Comelec En Banc Resolution dated June 7, 2022, finding that he is a nuisance candidate. Frederico claimed that the Comelec erred in applying the Dela Cruz ruling and countered that the votes of a nuisance candidate whose CoC was cancelled should be declared stray and’ must not be credited to the other candidate. Frederico also prayed for a Temporary Restraining Order or a Status Quo Ante Order against the Comelec’s directive to credit his votes to Romeo. Similarly, Roberto asked in G.R. No. 260650 for a Status Quo Ante Order to observe the prevailing conditions before the denial of Frederico’s Motion for Reconsideration. On June 15, 2022, the Comelec En Banc issued a Writ of Execution in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) ordering the PBOC to reconvene, credit the votes of Frederico to Romeo, and proclaim the winning candidate. On June 23, 2022, the PBOC convened and proclaimed Romeo as Zamboanga del Norte’s first district representative. The Petitions in G.R. No. 260650 and G.R. No. 260952 were then consolidated. Later, the Court granted the prayers for a Status Quo Ante Order and required the parties to observe the prevailing conditions before the issuance of the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022, and Resolution dated June 7, 2022. In its Comment, the Office of the Solicitor General (OSG) pointed out that the Comelec already proclaimed that Romeo won as district representative. Thus, the Comelec properly applied the Dela Cruz ruling that the votes received by a nuisance candidate should be credited to the legitimate candidate with the same surname. More importantly, we cannot disregard a fact basic in this controversy — that before the proclamation of petitioner on 18 May 2013, the COMELEC En Banc had already finally disposed of the issue of petitioner’s lack of Filipino citizenship and residency via its Resolution dated 14 May 2013. 

ISSUES:
At the core of these consolidated Petitions is the propriety of the suspension of proclamation of the winning candidate and the cancellation of Certificate of Candidacy (CoC) on the grounds of lack of bona fide intention to run for public office and voter confusion because of similarity in surnames. As such, the issues raised in the Petitions partake the nature of an election contest within the exclusive jurisdiction of the House of Representatives Electoral Tribunal (HRET). Assuming the Court may decide the case, the OSG maintained that there was no violation of due process because Roberto is not a real party in interest in SPA No. 21-224 (DC). Also, the OSG asserted that the Comelec aptly denied Frederico’s Motion for Reconsideration because it was filed out of time. On the merits, the OSG argued that the Comelec correctly held that Frederico is a nuisance candidate because his choice of the moniker “Kuya Jan” is confusingly similar to Romeo’s nickname “Kuya Jonjon” and has the potential to mislead the voters. 


RULINGS:
The Court has jurisdiction to review the decisions and orders of the Commission on Elections. The 1987 Constitution is explicit that the Court has the power to review any decision, order, or ruling of the Comelec through a petition for certiorari. Apropos is Article IX (A), Section 7 of the Constitution. The Court interpreted the constitutional provision as limited to final orders, rulings, and decisions of the Comelec En Banc in the exercise of its adjudicatory or quasi-judicial powers. Verily, the Court has jurisdiction over the Petitions assailing the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022, that suspended Roberto’s proclamation, and its Resolution dated June 7, 2022, which affirmed Frederico’s declaration as a nuisance candidate. Contrary to the OSG and Romeo’s theory, the HRET has no appellate jurisdiction over rulings of the Comelec En Banc. The HRET lacks authority to decide on whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate, and the proper recourse is to timely file a petition for certiorari before this Court, thus: The HRET did not commit any grave abuse of discretion in declaring that it has no jurisdiction to determine whether Alvin John was a nuisance candidate. If Wigberto timely filed a petition before this Court within the period allotted for special actions and questioned Alvin John’s nuisance candidacy, then it is proper for this Court to assume jurisdiction and rule on the matter. As things stand, the COMELEC En Banc‘s ruling on Alvin John’s nuisance candidacy had long become final and executory. True, the Court in Limkaichong v. Comelec held that the proclamation of a winning candidate divests the Comelec of its “jurisdiction over matters pending before it at the time of the proclamation.” However, this statement must be read in the context of a pending case and not to final orders, rulings, and decisions of the Comelec En Banc in the exercise of its adjudicatory or quasi-judicial powers. Again, these matters may be reviewed only through a petition for certiorari before this Court. Otherwise, it would serve as a license to relitigate all issues already resolved by the Comelec on the unqualified interpretation that the HRET’s jurisdiction should be full and complete. . It is the Court, not the HRET, that is the proper body to review a Comelec Resolution. The HRET cannot declare a nuisance candidate and cancel a candidate’s CoC. This remedial vehicle is instituted in the Omnibus Election Code (OEC) and the Comelec Rules of Procedure and logically filed before elections. In other words, the OSG and Romeo’s argument that the HRET should take cognizance of the case would deprive Roberto of any remedy to challenge the election results. The HRET has no jurisdiction over a proclaimed winner who has not yet taken a proper oath and assumed office The HRET’s jurisdiction is limited to the election, returns, and qualification of the “Members” of the House of Representatives. The HRET has no jurisdiction over a proclaimed district representative winner unless the following requisites concur: (1) a valid proclamation, (2) a proper oath, and (3) assumption of office. There must also be a petition duly filed with the electoral tribunal. Consequently, before there is a valid or official taking of the oath it must be made (1) before the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and (2) in open session. Here, although she made the oath before Speaker Belmonte, there is no indication that it was made during plenary or in open session and, thus, it remains unclear whether the required oath of office was indeed complied with. After 14 May 2013, there was, before the COMELEC, no longer any pending case on petitioner’s qualifications to run for the position of Member of the House of Representatives. Here, Romeo had not satisfied the requisite of a proper oath of office. The Rules of the House of Representatives require its members to take their oath or affirmation collectively or individually before the Speaker in open session. The oath enables the members to enter into the performance of their functions and participate in the House deliberations and other proceedings. The “oath or affirmation” before the Speaker of the House in open session is not an empty ritual. To be sure, the third sentence of Rule II, Section 6 of the Rules of the House of Representatives provides for the significant consequential effects of the oath or affirmation before the Speaker in open session, viz.: Section 6. Oath or Affirmation of Members. – Members shall take their oath or affirmation collectively or individually before the Speaker in open session. The oath of office administered by the Speaker in open session to all Members present is a ceremonial affirmation of prior and valid oaths of office administered to them by duly authorized public officers. Following parliamentary precedents, Members take their oath before the Speaker in open session to enable them to enter into the performance of their functions and participate in the deliberations and other proceedings of the House. The rule has two scenarios – (1) oath before the Speaker of the House; and (2) oath before duly authorized public officers. In the first scenario, only an oath is required before the Speaker of the House and not an affirmation. In the second scenario, the oath of office before the Speaker of the House in open session is a ceremonial affirmation of a prior and valid oath before duly authorized public officers. In both cases, the oath before the Speaker of the House in open session will enable the members to “enter into the performance of their functions and participate in the deliberations and other proceedings of the House.” Here, Romeo did not take an oath before the Speaker of the House in open session which bars him from performing his functions and participating in the congressional deliberation. Thus, the required oath, as a ceremonial affirmation of a previous valid oath before duly authorized public officers, is not present. Moreover, Romeo had not yet assumed office. It cannot be said that Romeo became a member of the House of Representatives by “operation of law” pursuant to Article VI, Section 7 of the 1987 Constitution. The theory on “assumption by operation of law” which coincides on June 30 following the election is an over-stretched interpretation of the constitutional provision. The language of the provision is about the commencement of the term of office of “Members” which shall begin “at noon on the thirtieth day of June next following their elections.” This provision likewise sets the rule on term limitation such that “[n]o member of the House of Representatives shall serve for more than three consecutive terms.” However, the term of office refers to a fixed duration which is not analogous to assumption of office that pertains to overt acts in the discharge of one’s duties. Also, the term of office commences on June 30 following the elections, unlike the assumption of office which may transpire at a different time. Verily, assumption of office cannot be constructive but must involve actual discharge of duties. As discussed above, Romeo’s failure to take an oath before the Speaker of the House bars him from performing hit functions and participating in the deliberations. The proposed theory on “assumption by operation of law” will also effectively remove Article 234 of the Revised Penal Code which punishes the crime of refusal to discharge elective office which states that “[t]he penalty of arresto mayor or a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who, having been elected by popular election to a public office, shall refuse without legal motive to be sworn in or to discharge the duties of said office.” Differently stated, no person elected by popular election to public office may be charged and convicted of this crime after June 30 following the election since he or she is deemed to have assumed office by operation of law. Again, it is basic in statutory construction that every statute must be so interpreted and brought in accord with other laws as to form a uniform system of jurisprudence – interpretere et concordare legibus est optimus interpretendi. In addition, Romeo had not yet assumed office in view of the Status Quo Ante Order requiring the parties to observe the last, actual, peaceable, and uncontested state of things before the issuance of the assailed Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022 and Resolution dated June 7, 2022. The issue on the validity of the Resolution of the COMELEC Second Division has not yet been resolved by the COMELEC en banc. To stress again, at the time of the proclamation of respondent Locsin, the validity of the Resolution of the COMELEC Second Division was seasonably challenged by the petitioner in his Motion for Reconsideration. The issue was still within the exclusive jurisdiction of the COMELEC en banc to resolve. Hence, the HRET cannot assume jurisdiction over the matter. In Puzon vs. Cua even the HRET ruled that the “doctrinal ruling that once a proclamation has been made and a candidate-elect has assumed office, it is this Tribunal that has jurisdiction over an election contest involving members of the House of Representatives, could not have been immediately applicable due to the issue regarding the validity of the very COMELEC pronouncements themselves.” This is because the HRET has no jurisdiction to review resolutions or decisions of the COMELEC, whether issued by a division or en banc. The instant case does not involve the election and qualification of respondent Locsin. A petition for quo warranto may be filed only on the grounds of ineligibility and disloyalty to the Republic of the Philippines. In the case at bar, neither the eligibility of the respondent Locsin nor her loyalty to the Republic of the Philippines is in question. There is no issue that she was qualified to run, and if she won, to assume office. A petition for quo warranto in the HRET is directed against one who has been duly elected and proclaimed for having obtained the highest number of votes but whose eligibility is in question at the time of such proclamation. It is evident that respondent Locsin cannot be the subject of [a] quo warranto proceeding in the HRET. She lost the elections to the petitioner by a wide margin. Her proclamation was a patent nullity. Her premature assumption to office as Representative of the 4th legislative district of Leyte was void from the beginning. Similarly, the present Petitions involved a question on the validity of the proclamation. The Comelec proclaimed Romeo as the winner after it credited the votes of Frederico to him and earlier suspended Roberto’s proclamation. Absent the assailed Comelec Resolution and Order, Roberto should have been proclaimed because he garnered the highest number of votes after the election results were canvassed. Romeo is merely a second placer. Thus, it is incumbent upon the Court to determine the validity of Romeo’s proclamation before dismissing the case on jurisdictional grounds. This is consistent with the principle of adherence to jurisdiction – that once it is attached, it cannot be ousted by subsequent happenings or events, although a character of which would have prevented jurisdiction from attaching in the first instance, and it retains jurisdiction until it finally disposes of the case. This approach would recognize the importance of proceedings with the Comelec subject to the review of this Court if there were grave abuse of discretion. Pursuant to Sections 6 and 7 of Republic Act (RA) No. 6646 or “[t]he Electoral Reforms Law of 1987,” the Comelec’s authority to suspend the proclamation of a candidate who receives the highest number of votes with a pending case for disqualification applies also to a petition to deny due course to or cancel a CoC under Section 78 of the OEC based “exclusively on the ground that any material representation contained therein as required under Section 74 hereof is false,” Section 6. Effect of Disqualification Case. — Any candidate who has been declared by final judgment to be disqualified shall not be voted for, and the votes cast for him shall not be counted. If for any reason a candidate is not declared by final judgment before an election to be disqualified and he is voted for and receives the winning number of votes in such election, the Court or Commission shall continue with the trial and hearing of the action, inquiry, or protest and, upon motion of the complainant or any intervenor, may during the pendency thereof order the suspension of the proclamation of such candidate whenever the evidence of his guilt is strong. Section 7. Petition to Deny Due Course to or Cancel a Certificate of Candidacy. — The procedure hereinabove provided shall apply to petitions to deny due course to or cancel a certificate of candidacy as provided in Section 78 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 881. Section 78. Petition to deny due course to or cancel a certificate of candidacy. — A verified petition seeking to deny due course or to cancel a certificate of candidacy may be filed by the person exclusively on the ground that any material representation contained therein as required under Section 74 hereof is false. The petition may be filed at any time not later than twenty-five days from the time of the filing of the certificate of candidacy and shall be decided, after due notice and hearing, not later than fifteen days before the election. Yet, a similar power to suspend the proclamation of a winning candidate is not available in proceedings filed under Section 69 of the OEC or a petition to refuse to give due course to or cancel a CoC against an alleged nuisance candidate. Hence, the Comelec gravely abused its discretion when it suspended Roberto’s proclamation in a pending proceeding under Section 69 of the OEC against Frederico. Further, public policy dictates that candidates receiving the highest votes should be proclaimed without unnecessary delay. The laws mandate the board of canvassers to receive the election returns and immediately canvass those that may have been received. The board of canvassers must continuously meet from day to day until the canvass is completed and may adjourn only to await the other election returns. The board of canvassers is a ministerial body and its power is generally limited to the mechanical function of adding or compiling the votes cast for each candidate as shown on the face of the returns before it and declaring the result. The purpose of the board of canvassers is to ascertain and declare the apparent result of the voting while all other questions are tried before the court or tribunal contesting the elections. The suspension of proclamation of a winning candidate is not a matter which the Comelec can dispose of motu proprio. In this case, however, the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022, came after the PBOC suspended the proclamation. Obviously, the Comelec and the PBOC unnecessarily deferred the proclamation and went against the policy that winning candidates should be proclaimed without delay. The PBOC suspended the proclamation motu proprio when it gave effect to the “advanced copy” of the suspension order despite the glaring irregularities. Verily, the pertinent election laws and rules require strong evidence to deny or cancel CoC as basis to suspend the proclamation of a winning candidate. The suspension of Roberto’s proclamation depends not only on whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate but also on the statistical probability of affecting the outcome of the elections. However, the Comelec En Banc issued the suspension order based on Romeo’s bare allegation. Here, Romeo failed to allege the percentage of election returns received and canvassed when be moved to suspend the proclamation of the leading candidate. Romeo did not even submit any document or certification from PBOC to support his prayer to suspend the proclamation. Here, the motu proprio suspension of proclamation denied Roberto his opportunity to be heard, which must be construed as a chance to explain one’s side or an occasion to seek a reconsideration of the complained action or ruling. Yet, the proclamation of Roberto was ordered suspended in a proceeding where he is not a party. In election cases, the requirement of due process is satisfied if the parties are given a fair and reasonable opportunity to clarify their respective positions. As such, the Comelec should have at the very least notified and heard Roberto. Otherwise, the proclamation of a candidate may be unjustly suspended simply because of the pendency of the nuisance case. Worse, the manner of informing the PBOC of the advance copy of the suspension order led it to motu proprio suspend Roberto’s proclamation. Taken together, the Comelec gravely abused its power and violated the rules on basic fairness when it suspended the proclamation of Roberto without giving him the opportunity to be heard. The Court has allowed several cases to proceed in the broader interest of justice despite procedural defects and lapses. These rulings are in keeping with the principle that rules of procedure are mere tools designed to facilitate the attainment of justice. Specifically, the Comelec Rules of Procedure provides that “[i]n the interest of justice and in order to obtain speedy disposition of all matters pending before the Commission, these rules and any portion thereof may be suspended by the Commission.” Here, the Comelec En Banc is deemed to have relaxed its procedures when it resolved the merits of the motion for reconsideration. In any event, the circumstances of the case merit the liberal application of the rules in the interest of substantial justice. The Comelec received Frederico’s Motion only more than an hour past 5:00 p.m. More importantly, the issue of whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate is determinative not only of the proper treatment of his votes but also as to the outcome of the elections. The grave injustice to Frederico is likewise not commensurate with his failure to comply with the rules. Thus, compelling reasons exist for the Court to finally settle the question of whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate. Clearly, nuisance candidates are those who filed their CoCs: (1) to put” the election process in mockery or disrepute; (2) to cause confusion among the voters by the similarity of the names of the registered candidates; or (3) under circumstances or acts which clearly demonstrate that the candidate has no bona fide intention to run for the office for which the CoC has been filed. The common thread of the three instances is that nuisance candidates filed their CoCs not to aspire or seek public office but to prevent “a faithful determination of the true will of the electorate.” Remarkably, even before the enactment of Section 69 of the OEC the Court already acknowledged the Comelec’s authority to refuse due course to CoCs filed in bad faith pursuant to its mandate to ensure free, orderly, and honest elections. In subsequent cases, the Court held that limiting the names of candidates appearing on the ballots for those with “bona fide” intention to run for office is permissible. The Court observed that the greater the number of candidates, the greater opportunities for logistical confusion, not to mention the increased allocation of time and resources in preparation for election. As such, remedial actions should be available to alleviate the logistical hardships in the preparation and conduct of elections, whenever necessary and proper. Moreover, the Court stressed that the importance of barring nuisance candidates from participating in the electoral exercise is the avoidance of confusion and frustration in the democratic process by preventing a faithful determination of the true will of the electorate. It seeks to address the “dirty trick” employed by political rival operators to reduce the votes of the legitimate candidates due to the similarity of names and particularly benefitting from Comelec’s “slow-moving decision-making.” In this case, the Comelec declared Frederico a nuisance candidate because he has no bona fide intention to run for public office, and his surname and nickname can cause confusion among voters. On this score, we reiterate that the Comelec has the ministerial duty to receive and acknowledge a CoC submitted within the filing period using the prescribed form. The candidate’s name will be on the ballot unless the CoC is withdrawn or canceled. Corollary, the question of who may be considered a nuisance candidate is a factual issue that should be decided minutely and wisely. It is also incumbent upon Romeo to establish the acts or circumstances showing that Frederico is a nuisance candidate, with the objective to prevent a faithful determination of the true will of the electorate. Yet, Romeo heavily relied on Frederico’s lack of political experience, and the similarity of their surnames and nicknames. Here, NUP’s registration as a political party means it has met all the criteria under the law. The Comelec even verified NUP’s government programs and extent of constituency. Corollarily, the nomination of Frederico and his acceptance as NUP’s official candidate meant that he embodies the party’s ideals and principles which he is obliged to carry out and represent to the electorates. Indeed, Frederico enjoyed NUP’s full logistical, financial; and organizational support in his candidacy. Frederico’s lack of political experience also does not undermine his seriousness in running for public office. Absent contrary evidence, Frederico’s candidacy can hardly be considered a sham since bad faith is a factual issue that is never presumed. In any case, the Court had ruled that the candidate’s bona fide intention to run for public office is neither subject to any property qualifications nor dependent upon membership in a political party, popularity, or degree of success in the elections. Other circumstances exist that belie bona fide intent. As correctly alleged by [Romeo], [Frederico] does not appear to have the support and capacity required to launch a credible campaign. The bare reliance on the support of his political party is insufficient. The finding of the Comelec Second Division that Frederico is not a registered voter is likewise erroneous because the decision of the first-level court denying Frederico’s Petition to be included in the list of voters has not yet attained finality. Indeed, the Regional Trial Court subsequently reversed the decision and ordered the registration of Frederico as a voter. Accordingly, the Court should not allow the Comelec to perfunctorily invoke the evil caused by nuisance candidates without adequate proof to support a conclusion that a candidate is a nuisance in the first place. Likewise, there is a distant possibility of voter confusion because the entries appearing on the ballots are not indistinguishable. The automated elections system (AES) ensured sufficient identifiers on the entries appearing on the ballots. The striking difference in their names appearing on the ballots are more than enough for the voters to distinguish the entries in the ballots despite the similarity in the surnames. Apparently, “Kuya Jan” and “Romeo” are distinct from each other. Also, with AES, the Comelec’s observation that the nicknames “Kuya Jonjon” and “Kuya Jan” are phonetically identical becomes inconsequential. The principle of “idem sonans” or the similarity in the pronunciation is irrelevant because the voters only need to shade the oval beside their chosen candidate. The claim that the voters would be confused with the candidates’ nicknames is a product of too much inference without adequate proof. To be sure, the only evidence that Romeo was known to his constituents as “Jonjon” is his COC in the 2019 elections. Yet, Romeo did not choose such nickname to appear on the ballots. Romeo consistently preferred “Romeo Jalosjos, Jr.” both in the 2019 and 2022 elections. This shows that Romeo presents himself to the voter as “Romeo” more than “Jonjon.” Besides, Romeo claimed that the nickname “Jonjon” underscores that he has the same name as his father. Thus, the voters would readily recognize “Romeo” as referring to “Jalosjos, Romeo Jr.” and not to “Jalosjos, Kuya Jan.” Further, the filing of CoCs is an integral process in the elections that permits the placing of the names of the candidates before the electorates. The CoC is an authorized badge that the voters could scrutinize details relating to the candidates before casting their ballots. In this case, the voters are deemed able to distinguish between “Romeo” and “Kuya Jan” with the filing of their CoCs. It is more prudent to conclude that the voters know whom they are voting for before casting their ballots. To hold otherwise absent proof is to speculate. Moreover, a campaign precedes the elections where the candidates can promote themselves and remove any bemusement with other contenders because of perceived similarity in their first names, nicknames, or surnames. Here, the Comelec (Second Division) did not discuss how the inclusion of Frederico’s name in the ballots would prevent the faithful determination of the will of the electorate. The Comelec’s observation of an “inversely proportional relationship between identity of names and the required proof showing the absence of bona fide intent” is erroneous. The opinion is based on a misreading of the cited cases and does not excuse the Comelec from identifying why a particular candidacy would prevent the determination of the will of the people. In the “middle” of the spectrum are the cases where identical surnames and similar-sounding given names on the ballot adjudged as sufficient to constitute confusing similarity, such as Santos v. COMELEC. There, the fact that a candidate intentionally chose a similar sounding stage-name to appear on the ballot, despite never having used that name before, when taken with an apparent lack of support, was deemed sufficient to declare her a nuisance candidate. Clearly, each case must be reviewed on its individual facts and circumstances, but it appears from the foregoing that there is an inversely proportional relationship between identity of names and the required proof showing the absence of bona fide intent. Thus, the greater the similarity between the names of the candidates, the less indications of a lack of bona fide intent to run must be apparent, and vice-versa. At any rate, the erroneous use of a nickname registered in the CoC is not enough to declare a candidate nuisance. The proper recourse is to bring this to the attention of the Comelec as a defect of an entry in the CoC to disallow a candidate from using that nickname. The rules and regulations for the conduct of elections are mandatory before the election, but when they are sought to be enforced after the election, they are held to be directory only if that is possible, especially where, if they are held to be mandatory, innocent voters will be deprived of their votes without fault on their part. Thus, even if the CoC was not duly signed or does not contain the required data, the proclamation of the candidate as the winner may not be nullified on such grounds. The defects in the certificate should have been questioned before the election; they may not be questioned after the election without invalidating the will of the electorate, which should not be done. To uphold the cancellation of Frederico’s CoC due to an erroneous use of nickname after the votes were cast would render the electorates’ votes for Frederico worthless. The Court reminds that the use of wrong, irrelevant, and insufficient considerations in deciding an issue taints a decision maker’s action with grave abuse of discretion. A judgment rendered with grave abuse of discretion is void and cannot be the source of any right or obligation. All acts pursuant to such decision and all claims .emanating from it have no legal effect. A void judgment can never become final and any writ of execution based on it is likewise void. In sum, the Comelec committed grave abuse of discretion in canceling Frederico’s CoC absent supporting substantial evidence that he is a nuisance candidate. Frederico is a legitimate candidate and the votes he received are all valid. There is no more question as to the proper treatment of his votes. Consequently, these findings rendered moot the issue of whether the votes in favor of a nuisance candidate should be declared stray or must be credited to the legitimate candidate with the same surname.


