FACTS:
On November 16, 2021, Romeo filed a Verified Petition to declare Frederico a nuisance candidate and to cancel his CoC before the Commission on Elections (Comelec) docketed as SPA No. 21-224 (DC). Romeo alleged that Frederico has no bona fide intention to run for public office. Frederico indicated “Jalosjos” as his surname in his application for late registration of birth on April 26, 2021, and transferred his voter registration record only on May 20, 2021. Moreover, Frederico was not known as “Kuya Jan” which is confusingly like Romeo’s nickname “Kuya Jonjon.” Lastly, Frederico has no prior political experience. On the other hand, Frederico countered that he has a bona fide intention to run for public office given his government platforms. Frederico was the official candidate of the National Unity Party (NUP). Frederico likewise incurred expenses for his candidacy and extended aid to people affected during the pandemic which are ample proof of his financial capacity to wage a campaign. Ultimately, there was a remote possibility of voter confusion because the names appearing on the ballots are not identical. In a Resolution dated April 19, 2022, the Comelec Second Division declared Frederico a nuisance candidate. The Comelec explained that a candidate intending to win the elections would take steps to distinguish themselves from the other candidates. Any similarity in the names would produce the opposite effect and dilute the candidate’s voter base. Here, the nicknames “Kuya Jonjon” and “Kuya Jan” are phonetically identical. Frederico’s membership in a political party also does not automatically equate to a bona fide intention to run for public office, thus: Inasmuch as the Provincial Board of Canvassers (PBOC) of the Province of Zamboanga del Norte, through the chairperson of this PBOC, received by way of email from the Chair[person] of the Commission on Election (COMELEC) a copy of an Order to suspend the proclamation of candidate Roberto “Pinpin” Uy, Jr. x x x this board hereby resolve (sic) to suspend the proclamation of the said Roberto “Pinpin” Uy, Jr. consonance to the provision of COMELEC Resolution No. 10731. On the same day, the Comelec En Banc suspended Roberto’s proclamation. Yet, the Comelec was not unanimous. The dissenting members noted that Roberto’s right to due process was violated because he is not a party in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) and that the rules on suspension of proclamation is inapplicable in a proceeding to declare a nuisance candidate, thus: IN VIEW OF THE FOREGOING, the Commission (En Banc) hereby ORDERS the SUSPENSION OF PROCLAMATION of ROBERTO “PINPIN” UY, JR. as the Representative of the 1st Congressional District of Zamboanga del Norte. The suspension of the proclamation shall be effective until further orders from this Commission. Aggrieved, Roberto filed before the Comelec an Extremely Urgent Petition to direct the PBOC to proclaim him as the winning candidate having received the highest number of votes based on the complete transmission of election results. Roberto likewise filed a Special Entry of Appearance with Extremely Urgent Motion for Reconsideration Ad Cautelam in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) solely to lift the Order suspending his proclamation.Subsequently, Roberto withdrew the Petition and the entry of special appearance with Motion for Reconsideration. On May 31, 2022, Roberto filed a Petition for Certiorari, Prohibition, and Mandamus Ex Abudanti Ad Cautela before this Court docketed as G.R. No. 260650. Roberto questioned the suspension of his proclamation based on the “advanced copy” of the Comelec En Banc Order in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) where he-is not even a party. Roberto added that PBOC has the ministerial duty to proclaim the candidate with the highest votes. Roberto prayed for a Temporary Restraining Order against the Comelec Order dated May 12, 2022, and a mandatory injunction for the PBOC to reconvene and proclaim him as the winning candidate. In a Resolution elated June 7, 2022, the Comelec En Banc denied Frederico’s Motion for Reconsideration in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) because it was filed a day late. The Comelec noted that the Motion was sent through electronic mail beyond 5:00 p.m. on April 25, 2022, and is deemed filed the following day. At any rate, the Comelec affirmed the finding that Frederico is a nuisance candidate. The Comelec then directed that the votes of Frederico be credited to Romeo pursuant to the ruling in Dela Cruz v. Comelec that the votes received by a nuisance candidate should be credited to the legitimate candidate with the same surname, to wit: Respondent contends that having been proclaimed and having taken oath as representative of the 4th legislative district of Leyte, any question relative to her election and eligibility should be brought before the HRET pursuant to Section 17 of Article VI of the 1987 Constitution. The Decision in Codilla, Sr. involved an electoral case for membership in the House of Representatives for the 4th district of Leyte. Eufrocino Codilla, Sr. (Codilla, Sr.) should have been proclaimed the winner but because of the Comelec Division’s non-observance of due process, Ma. Victoria Locsin was instead proclaimed. Codilla, Sr. received the highest number of votes, but the Comelec Division suspended his proclamation without informing him and without strong evidence to support the suspension. Subsequently, the Comelec Division disqualified Codilla, Sr. and ordered the immediate proclamation of the second placer Ma. Victoria Locsin (Locsin). By the time the Comelec En Banc reversed the Comelec Division and resolved that Codilla, Sr. was not disqualified and that Locsin’s proclamation should be annulled, Locsin had already taken an oath and assumed office. Locsin then invoked the HRET’s jurisdiction to disregard the Comelec En Banc Resolution. The Court ruled that the HRET cannot automatically oust the Comelec of its jurisdiction in determining who should be proclaimed. The Court also held that Locsin’s proclamation is void because Codilla, Sr. was deprived of due process and was erroneously disqualified. [PBOC] VICE-CHAIR[PERSON]: x x x I listened to the arguments of both parties. I was also informed by the Chairperson of the outcome, of this brief talk with some representative of the Office of the CHAIR[PERSON]. Accordingly, she was assured that an official order will be released soon until sometime tonight. Otherwise, we are advised to proceed whatever course of action we deem right under the circumstance. I was also aware per information relayed to me from the Chairperson that they still have to procure the signatures of some Commissioners, whether he or she will assent or conform to this order, or dissent, we do not know. On April 19, 2022, Frederico received via electronic mail the Comelec Second Division’s Resolution declaring him a nuisance candidate. Frederico had five days from notice to move for reconsideration or until April 24, 2022. Considering that the last day fell on a Sunday, the time shall not run until the next working day. Accordingly, Frederico sent the Motion for Reconsideration through electronic mail on April 25, 2022, at 6:23 p.m. The Comelec En Banc denied the Motion for being filed a day late following the rule that any pleading sent through electronic mail beyond 5:00 p.m. is deemed filed the following day. Nonetheless, the Comelec affirmed the finding that Frederico is a nuisance candidate.

ISSUES:
On June 15, 2022, the Comelec En Banc issued a Writ of Execution in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) ordering the PBOC to reconvene, credit the votes of Frederico to Romeo, and proclaim the winning candidate. On June 23, 2022, the PBOC convened and proclaimed Romeo as Zamboanga del Norte’s first district representative. The Petitions in G.R. No. 260650 and G.R. No. 260952 were then consolidated. Later, the Court granted the prayers for a Status Quo Ante Order and required the parties to observe the prevailing conditions before the issuance of the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022, and Resolution dated June 7, 2022. The Court interpreted the constitutional provision as limited to final orders, rulings, and decisions of the Comelec En Banc in the exercise of its adjudicatory or quasi-judicial powers. Verily, the Court has jurisdiction over the Petitions assailing the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022, that suspended Roberto’s proclamation, and its Resolution dated June 7, 2022, which affirmed Frederico’s declaration as a nuisance candidate. Contrary to the OSG and Romeo’s theory, the HRET has no appellate jurisdiction over rulings of the Comelec En Banc. The HRET lacks authority to decide on whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate, and the proper recourse is to timely file a petition for certiorari before this Court, thus: Respondent Locsin submits that the COMELEC en banc has no jurisdiction to annul her proclamation. She maintains that the COMELEC en banc has been divested of jurisdiction to review the validity of her proclamation because she has become a member of the House of Representatives. Thus, she contends that the proper forum to question her membership to the House of Representatives is the House or Representatives Electoral Tribunal (HRET). Similarly, the present Petitions involved a question on the validity of the proclamation. The Comelec proclaimed Romeo as the winner after it credited the votes of Frederico to him and earlier suspended Roberto’s proclamation. Absent the assailed Comelec Resolution and Order, Roberto should have been proclaimed because he garnered the highest number of votes after the election results were canvassed. Romeo is merely a second placer. Thus, it is incumbent upon the Court to determine the validity of Romeo’s proclamation before dismissing the case on jurisdictional grounds. This is consistent with the principle of adherence to jurisdiction – that once it is attached, it cannot be ousted by subsequent happenings or events, although a character of which would have prevented jurisdiction from attaching in the first instance, and it retains jurisdiction until it finally disposes of the case. This approach would recognize the importance of proceedings with the Comelec subject to the review of this Court if there were grave abuse of discretion. To reiterate, this Court has the constitutional duty to review the decision, order, or ruling of the Comelec through a petition for certiorari. Moreover, the nature of the issues involved in the petitions concerning the suspension of proclamation and nuisance candidacy preclude the HRET from taking cognizance of the case. More importantly, the HRET has no jurisdiction over the petitions that were filed with this Court before any proclamation, oath, and assumption of office of any of the parties. Given that this Court has jurisdiction over the petitions, we now examine the propriety of the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022 and Resolution dated June 7, 2022.

RULINGS:
In the 2022 elections, four candidates, namely, Roberto “Pinpin” T. Uy, Jr. (Roberto), Romeo “Kuya Jonjon” M. Jalosjos, Jr. (Romeo), Frederico “Kuya Jan” P. Jalosjos (Frederico), and Richard Amazon, vied for the position of Zamboanga del Norte’s first district representative. WHEREFORE, premises considered, the Commission (Second Division) RESOLVED, as it hereby RESOLVES, to GRANT the instant Petition. FREDERICO P. JALOSJOS is declared a Nuisance Candidate. His Certificate of Candidacy for the position of Member, House of Representatives in connection with the 2022 NLE is hereby DENIED DUE COURSE/CANCELLED. Frederico sought reconsideration. Meantime, the elections were held on May 9, 2022. The following day, Romeo filed a Motion in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) asking to suspend the proclamation of the leading candidate Roberto based on the partial and unofficial results. Romeo asserted that he won the elections since the votes of Frederico must be credited to him. On May 11, 2022, the Provincial Board of Canvassers (PBOC) reported the final election results, to wit: Thereafter, the PBOC received through electronic mail an “advanced copy” of the Comelec En Banc Order in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) directing to suspend Roberto’s proclamation. Immediately, Roberto’s counsel pointed out that the Order was undated and does not contain the complete signatures of the members, a certification, and a notice signed by the Comelec’s Clerk of Court. In due course, the majority of PBOC members ruled that the “advanced copy” of the Order was irregular. However, the PBOC Chairperson dissented and called for a ten-minute recess. Meanwhile, the Comelec Chairperson confirmed the authenticity of the Order through a phone call. On May 12, 2022, at 2:05 a.m., the PBOC resolved to suspend Roberto’s proclamation, viz.: Given this May 12, 2022, in Manila, Philippines. WHEREFORE, premises considered, the Motion for Reconsideration is hereby DENIED. Further, the Commission (En Banc) hereby ORDERS that the votes obtained by Respondent-Movant FREDERICO P. JALOSJOS be credited in favor of Petitioner ROMEO M. JALOSJOS, JR. In accordance with the result thereof, the candidate who obtained the highest number of votes shall be PROCLAIMED as the duly elected Representative of the 1st Congressional District of Zamboanga del Norte. Dissatisfied, Frederico filed a Petition for Certiorari before this Court docketed as G.R. No. 260952. Frederico assailed the Comelec En Banc Resolution dated June 7, 2022, finding that he is a nuisance candidate. Frederico claimed that the Comelec erred in applying the Dela Cruz ruling and countered that the votes of a nuisance candidate whose CoC was cancelled should be declared stray and’ must not be credited to the other candidate. Frederico also prayed for a Temporary Restraining Order or a Status Quo Ante Order against the Comelec’s directive to credit his votes to Romeo. Similarly, Roberto asked in G.R. No. 260650 for a Status Quo Ante Order to observe the prevailing conditions before the denial of Frederico’s Motion for Reconsideration. Section 7. Each Commission shall decide by a majority vote of all its Members any case or matter brought before it within sixty days from the date of its submission for decision or resolution. A case or matter is deemed submitted for decision or resolution upon the filing of the last pleading, brief, or memorandum required by the rules of the Commission or by the Commission itself Unless otherwise provided by this Constitution or by law, any decision, order, or ruling of each Commission may be brought to the Supreme Court on certiorari by the aggrieved party within thirty days from receipt of a copy thereof. True, the Court in Limkaichong v. Comelec held that the proclamation of a winning candidate divests the Comelec of its “jurisdiction over matters pending before it at the time of the proclamation.” However, this statement must be read in the context of a pending case and not to final orders, rulings, and decisions of the Comelec En Banc in the exercise of its adjudicatory or quasi-judicial powers. Again, these matters may be reviewed only through a petition for certiorari before this Court. Otherwise, it would serve as a license to relitigate all issues already resolved by the Comelec on the unqualified interpretation that the HRET’s jurisdiction should be full and complete. In this case, it must be pointed out that Romeo’s proclamation as the winner is dependent on Comelec’s declaration of Frederico as a nuisance candidate. Unless the Comelec resolution is set aside, Romeo will be considered the winner because the votes of Frederico are presumed to be votes for Romeo. It is the Court, not the HRET, that is the proper body to review a Comelec Resolution. The HRET cannot declare a nuisance candidate and cancel a candidate’s CoC. This remedial vehicle is instituted in the Omnibus Election Code (OEC) and the Comelec Rules of Procedure and logically filed before elections. In other words, the OSG and Romeo’s argument that the HRET should take cognizance of the case would deprive Roberto of any remedy to challenge the election results. The HRET has no jurisdiction over a proclaimed winner who has not yet taken a proper oath and assumed office. The HRET’s jurisdiction is limited to the election, returns, and qualification of the “Members” of the House of Representatives. The HRET has no jurisdiction over a proclaimed district representative winner unless the following requisites concur: (1) a valid proclamation, (2) a proper oath, and (3) assumption of office. There must also be a petition duly filed with the electoral tribunal. In some cases, this Court held that once a proclamation has been made, Comelec’s jurisdiction is already lost, and the HRET’s own jurisdiction begins. However, it must be noted that in those cases, the doctrinal pronouncement was made in the context of a proclaimed candidate who had not only taken an oath of office but who had also assumed office, thus: From the foregoing, it is then clear that to be considered a Member of the House of Representatives, there must be a concurrence of the following requisites: (1) a valid proclamation, (2) a proper oath, and (3) assumption of office. Consequently, before there is a valid or official taking of the oath it must be made (1) before the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and (2) in open session. Here, although she made the oath before Speaker Belmonte, there is no indication that it was made during plenary or in open session and, thus, it remains unclear whether the required oath of office was indeed complied with. More importantly, we cannot disregard a fact basic in this controversy — that before the proclamation of petitioner on 18 May 2013, the COMELEC En Banc had already finally disposed of the issue of petitioner’s lack of Filipino citizenship and residency via its Resolution dated 14 May 2013. After 14 May 2013, there was, before the COMELEC, no longer any pending case on petitioner’s qualifications to run for the position of Member of the House of Representatives. Here, Romeo had not satisfied the requisite of a proper oath of office. The Rules of the House of Representatives require its members to take their oath or affirmation collectively or individually before the Speaker in open session. The oath enables the members to enter into the performance of their functions and participate in the House deliberations and other proceedings. The Office of the Deputy Secretary-General and Chief Counsel of the Legal Affairs Department informed this Court that the Office of the House of Representatives for the First District of Zamboanga del Norte remains vacant, to wit: In Compliance with the Honorable Court’s Resolution dated March 8, 2023 in the above-captioned cases, I hereby certify that Mr. Romeo Jalosjos, Jr. has not taken an oath or affirmation of office with the Honorable Speaker of the House of Representatives in open session. The “oath or affirmation” before the Speaker of the House in open session is not an empty ritual. To be sure, the third sentence of Rule II, Section 6 of the Rules of the House of Representatives provides for the significant consequential effects of the oath or affirmation before the Speaker in open session, viz.: Section 6. Oath or Affirmation of Members. – Members shall take their oath or affirmation collectively or individually before the Speaker in open session. The oath of office administered by the Speaker in open session to all Members present is a ceremonial affirmation of prior and valid oaths of office administered to them by duly authorized public officers. Following parliamentary precedents, Members take their oath before the Speaker in open session to enable them to enter into the performance of their functions and participate in the deliberations and other proceedings of the House. Moreover, Romeo had not yet assumed office. It cannot be said that Romeo became a member of the House of Representatives by “operation of law” pursuant to Article VI, Section 7 of the 1987 Constitution. The theory on “assumption by operation of law” which coincides on June 30 following the election is an over-stretched interpretation of the constitutional provision. The language of the provision is about the commencement of the term of office of “Members” which shall begin “at noon on the thirtieth day of June next following their elections.” This provision likewise sets the rule on term limitation such that “[n]o member of the House of Representatives shall serve for more than three consecutive terms.” However, the term of office refers to a fixed duration which is not analogous to assumption of office that pertains to overt acts in the discharge of one’s duties. Also, the term of office commences on June 30 following the elections, unlike the assumption of office which may transpire at a different time. Verily, assumption of office cannot be constructive but must involve actual discharge of duties. As discussed above, Romeo’s failure to take an oath before the Speaker of the House bars him from performing hit functions and participating in the deliberations. The proposed theory on “assumption by operation of law” will also effectively remove Article 234 of the Revised Penal Code which punishes the crime of refusal to discharge elective office which states that “[t]he penalty of arresto mayor or a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who, having been elected by popular election to a public office, shall refuse without legal motive to be sworn in or to discharge the duties of said office.” Differently stated, no person elected by popular election to public office may be charged and convicted of this crime after June 30 following the election since he or she is deemed to have assumed office by operation of law. Again, it is basic in statutory construction that every statute must be so interpreted and brought in accord with other laws as to form a uniform system of jurisprudence – interpretere et concordare legibus est optimus interpretendi. In addition, Romeo had not yet assumed office in view of the Status Quo Ante Order requiring the parties to observe the last, actual, peaceable, and uncontested state of things before the issuance of the assailed Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022 and Resolution dated June 7, 2022. The Court must stress that the controversy arose when the Comelec ordered the suspension of Roberto’s proclamation without allowing him to be heard (G.R. No. 260650) and is inextricably linked with Frederico’s declaration as a nuisance candidate and its consequences (G.R. No. 260952). The consolidated Petitions before this Court call for the determination of who should be proclaimed. In other words, the status quo to be maintained refers to the situation when neither Roberto nor Romeo was proclaimed. To hold that Roberto should be proclaimed in the interim is to defeat the very purpose of issuing the Status Quo Ante Order without the Court resolving the issues raised in these Petitions. The Status Quo Ante Order does not authorize any proclamation while the case is pending and renders any proclamation ineffective. In Garcia v. Mojica, the Court described a Status Quo Ante Order as follows: As explained by Justice Florenz D. Regalado, an authority on remedial law: “There have been instances when the Supreme Court has issued a status quo order which, as the very term connotes, is merely intended to maintain the last, actual, peaceable and uncontested state of things which preceded the controversy. This was resorted to when the projected proceedings in the case made the conservation of the status quo desirable or essential, but the affected party neither sought such relief or the allegations in his pleading did not sufficiently make out a case for a temporary restraining order. The status quo order was thus issued motu proprio on equitable considerations. Also, unlike a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction, a status quo order is more in the nature of a cease and desist order, since it neither directs the doing or undoing of acts as in the case of prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief. The further distinction is provided by the present amendment in the sense that, unlike the amended rule on restraining orders, a status quo order does not require the posting of a bond.” In issuing a Status Quo Ante Order, the Court considers several factors like justice and equity and the desirability of conserving the status quo or the last, actual, peaceable, and uncontested state of things which preceded the controversy. As explained in Garcia, a Status Quo Ante Order differs from a Temporary Restraining Order and may be issued on equitable considerations. The determination of who should be proclaimed the winner is a sufficient equitable consideration. It cannot be overemphasized that an election case is imbued with the public interest. It involves not only the adjudication of the private interests of rival candidates but also the paramount need to dispel the uncertainty which beclouds the real choice of the electorate with respect to who shall discharge the prerogatives of the office within their gift. In Codilla, Sr. v. Hon. De Venecia, the Court rejected the view that the proclamation and oath of office of an “elected” member of the House of Representatives automatically vest jurisdiction to the HRET without examining the context of the case. The nature of the pending case must still be scrutinized to determine the proper body to resolve or review the issues raised. When the validity of the proclamation rests on the questioned Comelec resolutions, the HRET cannot deprive the appropriate bodies, such as the Comelec or this Court, from exercising jurisdiction, thus: We find no merit in these contentions. We reject respondent’s contention. Respondent Locsin maintains that the proper recourse of the petitioner is to file a petition for quo warranto with the HRET. A petition for quo warranto may be filed only on the grounds of ineligibility and disloyalty to the Republic of the Philippines. In the case at bar, neither the eligibility of the respondent Locsin nor her loyalty to the Republic of the Philippines is in question. There is no issue that she was qualified to run, and if she won, to assume office. A petition for quo warranto in the HRET is directed against one who has been duly elected and proclaimed for having obtained the highest number of votes but whose eligibility is in question at the time of such proclamation. It is evident that respondent Locsin cannot be the subject of [a] quo warranto proceeding in the HRET. She lost the elections to the petitioner by a wide margin. Her proclamation was a patent nullity. Her premature assumption to office as Representative of the 4th legislative district of Leyte was void from the beginning. It is the height of absurdity for the respondent, as a loser, to tell petitioner Codilla, Sr., the winner, to unseat her via a quo warranto proceeding. Pursuant to Sections 6 and 7 of Republic Act (RA) No. 6646 or “the Electoral Reforms Law of 1987,” the Comelec’s authority to suspend the proclamation of a candidate who receives the highest number of votes with a pending case for disqualification applies also to a petition to deny due course to or cancel a CoC under Section 78 of the OEC based “exclusively on the ground that any material representation contained therein as required under Section 74 hereof is false,” thus: Section 6. Effect of Disqualification Case. — Any candidate who has been declared by final judgment to be disqualified shall not be voted for, and the votes cast for him shall not be counted. If for any reason a candidate is not declared by final judgment before an election to be disqualified and he is voted for and receives the winning number of votes in such election, the Court or Commission shall continue with the trial and hearing of the action, inquiry, or protest and, upon motion of the complainant or any intervenor, may during the pendency thereof order the suspension of the proclamation of such candidate whenever the evidence of his guilt is strong. Section 7. Petition to Deny Due Course to or Cancel a Certificate of Candidacy. — The procedure hereinabove provided shall apply to petitions to deny due course to or cancel a certificate of candidacy as provided in Section 78 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 881. Section 78. Petition to deny due course to or cancel a certificate of candidacy. — A verified petition seeking to deny due course or to cancel a certificate of candidacy may be filed by the person exclusively on the ground that any material representation contained therein as required under Section 74 hereof is false. The petition may be filed at any time not later than twenty-five days from the time of the filing of the certificate of candidacy and shall be decided, after due notice and hearing, not later than fifteen days before the election. Yet, a similar power to suspend the proclamation of a winning candidate is not available in proceedings filed under Section 69 of the OEC or a petition to refuse to give due course to or cancel a CoC against an alleged nuisance candidate. Hence, the Comelec gravely abused its discretion when it suspended Roberto’s proclamation in a pending proceeding under Section 69 of the OEC against Frederico. Further, public policy dictates that candidates receiving the highest votes should be proclaimed without unnecessary delay. The laws mandate the board of canvassers to receive the election returns and immediately canvass those that may have been received. The board of canvassers must continuously meet from day to day until the canvass is completed and may adjourn only to await the other election returns. The board of canvassers is a ministerial body and its power is generally limited to the mechanical function of adding or compiling the votes cast for each candidate as shown on the face of the returns before it and declaring the result. The purpose of the board of canvassers is to ascertain and declare the apparent result of the voting while all other questions are tried before the court or tribunal contesting the elections. The suspension of proclamation of a winning candidate is not a matter which the Comelec can dispose of motu proprio. In this case, the PBOC received the complete election results on May 11, 2022, and had clear basis to proclaim Roberto as the winning candidate for having garnered the highest number of votes. There is no reason to postpone the proclamation until the PBOC received through electronic mail an “advanced copy” of the Comelec En Banc Order in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) directing to suspend Roberto’s proclamation. Yet, the Order was undated and did not contain the complete signatures of the members, a certification, and a notice signed by the Comelec’s Clerk of Court. Interestingly, the minutes reveal that the Comelec Chairperson gave the PBOC the discretion to act on the “advanced copy” of the suspension order and decide how to proceed with the proclamation. In due course, the majority of PBOC members ignored the suspension order because of its patent irregularities, thus: We also do not know if such order is forthcoming. x x x In a sense this is not an official copy of the order. x x x [T]his is a mere scrap of paper. Also the CHAIR[PERSON] acknowledges such fact because x x x if they cannot send the copy today, we will proceed with whatever action is right under the premises. x x x I vote to proceed with the proclamation of the winning candidate of the first district. However, the PBOC Chairperson dissented from the majority decision to proceed with the proclamation and called for a recess. Meanwhile, the Comelec Chairperson confirmed the authenticity of the suspension order through a phone call. The PBOC heed the directive, resumed the canvassing proceedings, and resolved to suspend the proclamation, to wit: [PBOC] CHAIR[PERSON]: Let’s resume. After I talked with the CHAIR[PERSON] of the Commission, he informed us, the members of the Board, that this copy is an official copy. And we are directed to implement the order. [PBOC] VICE CHAIR[PERSON]: If I may explain, I talked with the CHAIR[PERSON] and I confronted him whether this order is an official order of the Commission and he answered me that it is an official order of the Commission. So, I changed my earlier ruling and I vote for the suspension of the proclamation. [PBOC] CHAIR[PERSON]: So, the PBOC already ruled with finality that we will follow the order of the Commission En Banc not to proclaim Roberto Uy[,] Jr[.] and hence we will proceed with the proclamation of the 2nd district Member of the House of Representatives. In these circumstances, the Court finds it odd for the Comelec Chairperson to intervene in the proclamation absent a duly issued suspension order. The Comelec Chairperson should have ensured that the suspension order was urgently released pursuant to the rules instead of contacting the PBOC members. Similarly, it would be prudent if the PBOC inquired about the veracity of the “advanced copy” of the suspension order with the Comelec Clerk of Court who is tasked to “execute orders, resolutions, decisions and processes issued by the Commission.” Indeed, the guidelines in the proclamation of winning candidates allow the ”fastest means available such as, but not limited to phone call, sending of electronic mail, etc.” of the Comelec’s action over petitions to disqualify or cancel the CoC of a candidate. But this quick measure is premised on the fact that the Comelec had duly acted on the matter. In this case, however, the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022, came after the PBOC suspended the proclamation. Obviously, the Comelec and the PBOC unnecessarily deferred the proclamation and went against the policy that winning candidates should be proclaimed without delay. The PBOC suspended the proclamation motu proprio when it gave effect to the “advanced copy” of the suspension order despite the glaring irregularities. In issuing the suspension order, the Comelec relied on its Resolution No. 9523, to wit: Section 8. Effect if Petition Unresolved. – If a Petition to Deny Due Course to or Cancel a Certificate of Candidacy is unresolved by final judgment on the day of elections, the petitioner may file a motion with the Division or Commission En Banc, as may be applicable, to suspend the proclamation of the candidate concerned, provided that the evidence for the grounds for denial to or cancel certificate of candidacy is strong. For this purpose, at least three (3) days prior to any election, the Clerk of the Commission shall prepare a list of pending cases and furnish all Commissioners copies of the said list. Verily, the pertinent election laws and rules require strong evidence to deny or cancel CoC as basis to suspend the proclamation of a winning candidate. The suspension of Roberto’s proclamation depends not only on whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate but also on the statistical probability of affecting the outcome of the elections. However, the Comelec En Banc issued the suspension order based on Romeo’s bare allegation. Here, Romeo failed to allege the percentage of election returns received and canvassed when be moved to suspend the proclamation of the leading candidate. Romeo did not even submit any document or certification from PBOC to support his prayer to suspend the proclamation. Here, the motu proprio suspension of proclamation denied Roberto his opportunity to be heard, which must be construed as a chance to explain one’s side or an occasion to seek a reconsideration of the complained action or ruling. Yet, the proclamation of Roberto was ordered suspended in a proceeding where he is not a party. In election cases, the requirement of due process is satisfied if the parties are given a fair and reasonable opportunity to clarify their respective positions. In Santos v. Comelec, the Court held that candidates who have no similarity in the name of the nuisance candidate are not real parties in interest and are mere “silent observers” in the nuisance case. However, nothing in Santos allows the suspension of proclamation of these silent observers without observance of due process of law. Evidently, the suspension order directly affected Roberto being the candidate who garnered the highest number of votes and who must be proclaimed without delay. As such, the Comelec should have at the very least notified and heard Roberto. Otherwise, the proclamation of a candidate may be unjustly suspended simply because of the pendency of the nuisance case. Worse, the manner of informing the PBOC of the advance copy of the suspension order led it to motu proprio suspend Roberto’s proclamation. Taken together, the Comelec gravely abused its power and violated the rules on basic fairness when it suspended the proclamation of Roberto without giving him the opportunity to be heard. On this point, we cannot overemphasize that courts have always tried to maintain a healthy balance between the strict enforcement of procedural laws and the guarantee that every litigant be given the full opportunity for the just disposition of his cause. The Court has allowed several cases to proceed in the broader interest of justice despite procedural defects and lapses. These rulings are in keeping with the principle that rules of procedure are mere tools designed to facilitate the attainment of justice. Specifically, the Comelec Rules of Procedure provides that “[i]n the interest of justice and in order to obtain speedy disposition of all matters pending before the Commission, these rules and any portion thereof may be suspended by the Commission.” Here, the Comelec En Banc is deemed to have relaxed its procedures when it resolved the merits of the motion for reconsideration. In any event, the circumstances of the case merit the liberal application of the rules in the interest of substantial justice. The Comelec received Frederico’s Motion only more than an hour past 5:00 p.m. More importantly, the issue of whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate is determinative not only of the proper treatment of his votes but also as to the outcome of the elections. The grave injustice to Frederico is likewise not commensurate with his failure to comply with the rules. Thus, compelling reasons exist for the Court to finally settle the question of whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate. The Comelec’s observation begs the following questions: (1) what then was the basis to consider Frederico’s membership in the political party as insignificant? (2) are the allegations of Romeo sufficient to conclude lack of bona fide intent? Notably, the use of the phrase “does not appear” in the assailed Resolution and the absence of particular evidence showing that Frederico’s political party will not support him show that the Comelec’s ruling is speculative. The finding of the Comelec Second Division that Frederico is not a registered voter is likewise erroneous because the decision of the first-level court denying Frederico’s Petition to be included in the list of voters has not yet attained finality. Indeed, the Regional Trial Court subsequently reversed the decision and ordered the registration of Frederico as a voter. Accordingly, the Court should not allow the Comelec to perfunctorily invoke the evil caused by nuisance candidates without adequate proof to support a conclusion that a candidate is a nuisance in the first place. At any rate, the erroneous use of a nickname registered in the CoC is not enough to declare a candidate nuisance. The proper recourse is to bring this to the attention of the Comelec as a defect of an entry in the CoC to disallow a candidate from using that nickname. The rules and regulations for the conduct of elections are mandatory before the election, but when they are sought to be enforced after the election, they are held to be directory only if that is possible, especially where, if they are held to be mandatory, innocent voters will be deprived of their votes without fault on their part. Thus, even if the CoC was not duly signed or does not contain the required data, the proclamation of the candidate as the winner may not be nullified on such grounds. The defects in the certificate should have been questioned before the election; they may not be questioned after the election without invalidating the will of the electorate, which should not be done. To uphold the cancellation of Frederico’s CoC due to an erroneous use of nickname after the votes were cast would render the electorates’ votes for Frederico worthless. The Court reminds that the use of wrong, irrelevant, and insufficient considerations in deciding an issue taints a decision maker’s action with grave abuse of discretion. A judgment rendered with grave abuse of discretion is void and cannot be the source of any right or obligation. All acts pursuant to such decision and all claims .emanating from it have no legal effect. A void judgment can never become final and any writ of execution based on it is likewise void. In sum, the Comelec committed grave abuse of discretion in canceling Frederico’s CoC absent supporting substantial evidence that he is a nuisance candidate. Frederico is a legitimate candidate and the votes he received are all valid. There is no more question as to the proper treatment of his votes. Consequently, these findings rendered moot the issue of whether the votes in favor of a nuisance candidate should be declared stray or must be credited to the legitimate candidate with the same surname. ACCORDINGLY, the consolidated Petitions are GRANTED. The Order dated May 12, 2022 and the Resolution dated June 7, 2022 of the Commission on Elections En Banc in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) are SET ASIDE on the ground of grave abuse of discretion. The proclamation of Romeo M. Jalosjos, Jr. arising from the execution of the assailed Order and Resolution is ANNULLED. The Commission on Elections is DIRECTED to proclaim Roberto T. Uy, Jr. as winner in the 2022 elections for the position of Zamboanga del Norte’s first district representative. The Status Quo Ante Order is LIFTED. The Decision shall be immediately executory.