FACTS:


ISSUES:
Its motion for reconsideration of the above decision having been denied, petitioner filed the instant petition on 2 March 1979. Private respondent subsequently submitted both her comment to the petition and comment to the supplemental petition.

RULINGS:
This is a petition for review on certiorari under Rule 45 of the Rules of Court seeking the reversal of the respondent Court of Appeals’ decision of 2 November 1978 in C.A.-G.R. No. SP-07822-R, the dispositive portion of which provides: “PREMISES CONSIDERED, the order of respondent Judge dated January 25, 1978 is SET ASIDE and respondent sheriff Jaime de Leon is hereby ordered to restore petitioner Corazon Babao Gonzales to the possession of the questioned premises No. 1265 Calle Sande, Tondo, Manila upon the filing by the latter of a bond in the amount of P10,000.00 for any and all damages which the Heirs of Eugenio Sevilla, Inc. may suffer. SO ORDERED.” On 17 June 1976, the petitioner filed an action for unlawful detainer in the City Court (now Metropolitan Trial Court) of Manila against Jesus A. Co; the complaint was docketed as Civil Case No. 12235-CV and was raffled to Branch I thereof.  Petitioner alleged therein that it is the owner of a parcel of land, with a theater building named Cinema Gigi, standing thereon, located at Calle Sande, Tondo, Manila, and that Jesus Co, as lessee of the theater building, failed to pay the agreed rentals at the rate of two thousand pesos (P2,000.00) a month since 1974.  In his Answer, Jesus Co countered that it is he who owns both the lot and the theater building, having acquired the same by virtue of a sale made by the petitioner; he further avers that on 15 June 1976, he leased Cinema Gigi to herein private respondent Corazon Babao-Gonzales for a period of ten (10) years. During the pendency of the unlawful detainer case, particularly on 30 September 1977, Jesus A. Co filed an action “To Quite (sic) Possession, Ownership and Issuance of Title” against the petitioner in the then Court of First Instance (now Regional Trial Court) of Manila.  The case involved the same property abovementioned and was docketed as Civil Case No. 105465.  A motion to dismiss the complaint was filed by the petitioner. On 30 September 1977, the City Court of Manila rendered a decision in the unlawful detainer case in favor of the petitioner, ordering, inter alia, defendant Jesus A. Co: “x x x and any and all persons, if any, claiming under him or otherwise privies to him in the occupancy of the said premises referred to in the complaint to vacate the same immediately; x x x.” Defendant Jesus A. Co failed to appeal from this decision, thus resulting in its becoming final and executory.  On 3 November 1977, a writ of execution was issued by the City Court and served by special sheriff Jaime L. de Leon on the occupants of the property. On 15 November 1977, Corazon Babao-Gonzales, respondent herein, claiming to be a lessee of Jesus A. Co with respect to the subject premises, filed with the Court of First Instance of Manila a petition for “Declaratory Relief and to Vacate Judgment, Execution Order and Notice to Vacate, with Prayer for Preliminary Injunction,” against herein petitioner, Jaime de Leon, National Deputy Sheriff, and the Hon. Judge Gregorio Garcia, Presiding Judge of Branch I, City Court of Manila. The case was docketed as Civil Case No. 112027. On 16 November 1977, after ejecting all the occupants of Cinema Gigi, sheriff Jaime de Leon padlocked and closed the premises, delivering, at the same time, possession thereof to the petitioner. On the same day, 16 November 1977, after the sheriff delivered possession of the subject premises to petitioner thru its president, Ramon S. Sevilla, and after the latter left the premises, Corazon Babao-Gonzales, together with Atty. Beltran Sotto and two John Does, forcibly destroyed the chain and padlocks of the building and took possession thereof. The following day, 17 November 1977, in Civil Case No. 112027, Judge Pedro Cenzon issued a restraining order prohibiting petitioner from reacquiring possession of the subject premises.  Petitioner filed a motion to lift the restraining order.  A hearing was thereafter conducted on said motion and Gonzales’ application for the issuance of a writ of preliminary injunction. b.  The writ of execution was duly served by the respondent sheriff, implemented and completed.  The possession of the premises in question has been turned over to the possession of the private respondent, Ramon Sevilla, by the respondent sheriff as per Exhibit 8. c.  If the petitioner (Corazon Babao-­Gonzales) is now in physical possession of the premises in question, such physical possession is a mere interference or disturbance of the possession of the private respondent (Heirs of Eugenio Sevilla, Inc.) after he (sic) acquired it when the respondent sheriff delivered the premises to him (sic) in compliance with the writ of execution.  There is nothing to restrain.  There (sic) respondent City Court judge has already ordered execution of the judgment and the respondent sheriff has already carried out the order and placed the private respondent in possession of the premises in question. d.  The petitioner is herself a wrong doer when she interferred (sic) with the possession of the private respondent after it was given to him (sic) by the respondent sheriff. On 9 February 1978, petitioner herein filed a motion praying that Gonzales and her counsel be held guilty of indirect contempt and be ordered to vacate the Cinema Gigi.  Acting thereon, Judge Jose B. Herrera issued on 8 March 1978 an Order directing “Deputy Sheriff Jaime de Leon, who may avail himself (sic) of the assistance of any law enforcement agency, to eject the defendant Jesus A. Co and all other persons claiming right (sic) under him from the premises of Cine GIGI situated at Calle Sande St., Tondo, Manila, and to restore plaintiff to the possession thereof.” Her motion to reconsider the Order of Judge Pedro Cenzon in Civil Case No. 112027 of 25 January 1978 having been denied, herein private respondent Babao-Gonzales filed with the respondent Court on 25 May 1978 “a Petition for Review with Prayer for Preliminary Injunction and Damages,” docketed as C.A.-G.R. No. SP-07822-R.  In the said petition, private respondent claimed that she has a better right to possess the subject premises and prayed, inter alia, that a writ of preliminary mandatory injunction be issued to restore her to the possession of the questioned premises.  On 2 November 1978, the respondent Court rendered a decision setting aside the 25 January 1978 Order of Judge Pedro Cenzon and ordering Sheriff Jaime de Leon to restore respondent Corazon Babao-Gonzales to the possession of the questioned premises upon the filing of a bond to answer for any and all damages that may be suffered by petitioner corporation. In granting the petition, respondent Court relied on the following arguments: Whether certiorari, petition for review, or appeal to the Court of Appeals is the proper remedy against, a final order or decision of the Court of First Instance in a petition for Declaratory Relief. This petition is impressed with merit. In view of the above final decision and order, herein private respondent cannot claim any better right than Mr. Co. WHEREFORE, the petition is GRANTED.  The assailed decision of the respondent Court of Appeals in C.A-G.R. SP-07822-R is hereby REVERSED and SET ASIDE and the Order of the trial court of 25 January 1978 in Civil Case No. 112027 is REINSTATED.