FACTS:
Fianza was charged with two (2) counts of violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610 under two (2) Informations dated April 6, 2011 filed before the RTC. The prosecution’s version of the incidents are as follows: Sometime in July 2010, AAA, who was then 11 years old, was called by Fianza to his house and thereupon, was asked to wash his clothes. After AAA was finished with the laundry, Fianza asked her to go with him to the kamalig. Thereat, they proceeded to the second floor where Fianza removed his pants and briefs, lied down, and ordered AAA to hold his penis and masturbate him. After ejaculating, Fianza put on his clothes, and gave P20.00 to AAA who, thereafter, went home. After the second incident, AAA related the matter to her cousin, CCC, who, in turn, told BBB, AAA’s mother, who reported the matter to the police.

ISSUES:
The essential issue for the Court’s resolution is whether or not the CA correctly upheld Fianza’s conviction.

RULINGS:
Aggrieved, Fianza elevated his conviction to the CA, docketed as CA-G.R. CR No. 35293. In a Decision dated November 24, 2014, the CA upheld Fianza’s conviction for two (2) counts of violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. At the outset, the Court deems it appropriate to correct the appellation of the crime with which Fianza was charged to Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC considering that the victim, AAA, was only 11 years old at the time of the incidents. In instances where the child subjected to sexual abuse through lascivious conduct is below twelve (12) years of age, the offender should be prosecuted under Article 336 of the RPC, but suffer the higher penalty of reclusion temporal in its medium period in accordance with Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610, which pertinently reads: SECTION 5. Child Prostitution and Other Sexual Abuse. – Children, whether male or female, who for money, profit, or any other consideration or due to the coercion or influence of any adult, syndicate or group, indulge in sexual intercourse or lascivious conduct, are deemed to be children exploited in prostitution and other sexual abuse. The elements of Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC are: (a) the offender commits any act of lasciviousness or lewdness; (b) the lascivious act is done under any of the following circumstances: (i) by using force or intimidation; (ii) when the offended party is deprived of reason or otherwise unconscious; or (iii) when the offended party is under twelve (12) years of age; and (c) the offended party is another person of either sex. On the other hand, sexual abuse, as defined under Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610 has three (3) elements: (a) the accused commits an act of sexual intercourse or lascivious conduct; (b) the said act is performed with a child exploited in prostitution or subjected to other sexual abuse; and (c) the child is below eighteen (18) years old. The term “influence” means the “improper use of power or trust in any way that deprives a person of free will and substitutes another’s objective.” On the other hand, “coercion” is the “improper use of x x x power to compel another to submit to the wishes of one who wields it.” With the foregoing parameters considered, the Court finds that Fianza’s acts were attended by coercion or influence within the contemplation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. It is undisputed that AAA was only 11 years old at the time of the incidents, hence, considered a child under the law. Section 3 (a), Article I of RA 7610 defines children in this wise: Case law states that a child, such as AAA in this case, is presumed to be incapable of giving rational consent to any lascivious act. In Malto v. People, the Court explained: Records likewise indicate that Fianza was about 35 years old at the time of the commission of the offense, or 24 years older than AAA, more or less. The age disparity between them clearly placed Fianza in a stronger position over AAA which enabled him to wield his will on the latter. In this case, Fianza had been fully apprised of the charges against him since the Informations stated the approximate date of the commission of the offense to be “sometime during the month of July 2010.” Indeed, the precise date and time of the incidents are not among the elements of sexual abuse under Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. Force or intimidation in cases involving prosecutions for Rape and Acts of Lasciviousness is defined as “power, violence or constraint exerted upon or against a person.” In People v. Maceda, the Court explained the standards for evaluating the force or intimidation employed in rape, which equally applies to Acts of Lasciviousness as well as violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610: Notably, Fianza failed to refute AAA’s claim that she was compelled to do as he instructed because he threatened to humiliate her and her family. In Amployo v. People, a case involving a similar prosecution for lascivious conduct committed on an eight-year-old minor, the Court held that intimidation need not necessarily be irresistible, especially in the case of young girls, thus: Intimidation need not necessarily be irresistible. It is sufficient that some compulsion equivalent to intimidation annuls or subdues the free exercise of the will of the offended party. This is especially true in the case of young, innocent and immature girls who could not be expected to act with equanimity of disposition and with nerves of steel. Young girls cannot be expected to act like adults under the same circumstances or to have the courage and intelligence to disregard the threat. (Emphasis supplied) It is not hard to imagine 11-year-old AAA being intimidated and cowed into silence and submission by her neighbor, a full grown adult male old enough to be her parent, with threat of humiliation, should she not give in to his dastardly desires. She is still a child not capable of fully understanding or knowing the import of her actions. Verily, in almost all cases of sexual abuse, the credibility of the victim’s testimony is crucial in view of the intrinsic nature of the crime where only the persons involved can testify as to its occurrence. Hence, the Court accords a high degree of respect to the assessment of the trial court which is in the best position to observe the declarations and demeanor of the witnesses, and evaluate their credibility, even more so when the same is affirmed by the CA, as in this case. WHEREFORE, the petition is DENIED. The Decision dated November 24, 2014 and the Resolution dated May 29, 2015 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CR No. 35293 are hereby SET ASIDE and a new one is entered finding petitioner Christopher Fianza a.k.a. “Topel” (Fianza) GUILTY beyond reasonable doubt of two (2) counts of Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the Revised Penal Code in relation to Section 5 (b), Article III of Republic Act No. 7610. Fianza is sentenced to suffer the penalty of imprisonment of twelve (12) years and one (1) day of reclusion temporal in its minimum period, as minimum, to fifteen (15) years, six (6) months, and twenty (20) days of reclusion temporal in its medium period, as maximum, and is ordered to pay AAA the amounts of P15,000.00 as fine, P20,000.00 as civil indemnity, and P15,000.00 as moral damages, for each count, plus legal interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the finality of this judgment until full payment.