FACTS:
In the 2022 elections, four candidates, namely, Roberto “Pinpin” T. Uy, Jr. (Roberto), Romeo “Kuya Jonjon” M. Jalosjos, Jr. (Romeo), Frederico “Kuya Jan” P. Jalosjos (Frederico), and Richard Amazon, vied for the position of Zamboanga del Norte’s first district representative. SO ORDERED. Frederico sought reconsideration. Meantime, the elections were held on May 9, 2022. The following day, Romeo filed a Motion in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) asking to suspend the proclamation of the leading candidate Roberto based on the partial and unofficial results. Romeo asserted that he won the elections since the votes of Frederico must be credited to him. On May 11, 2022, the Provincial Board of Canvassers (PBOC) reported the final election results, to wit: Thereafter, the PBOC received through electronic mail an “advanced copy” of the Comelec En Banc Order in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) directing to suspend Roberto’s proclamation. Immediately, Roberto’s counsel pointed out that the Order was undated and does not contain the complete signatures of the members, a certification, and a notice signed by the Comelec’s Clerk of Court. In due course, the majority of PBOC members ruled that the “advanced copy” of the Order was irregular. However, the PBOC Chairperson dissented and called for a ten-minute recess. Meanwhile, the Comelec Chairperson confirmed the authenticity of the Order through a phone call. On May 12, 2022, at 2:05 a.m., the PBOC resolved to suspend Roberto’s proclamation, viz.: Inasmuch as the Provincial Board of Canvassers (PBOC) of the Province of Zamboanga del Norte, through the chairperson of this PBOC, received by way of email from the Chair[person] of the Commission on Election (COMELEC) a copy of an Order to suspend the proclamation of candidate Roberto “Pinpin” Uy, Jr. x x x this board hereby resolve (sic) to suspend the proclamation of the said Roberto “Pinpin” Uy, Jr. consonance to the provision of COMELEC Resolution No. 10731. On the same day, the Comelec En Banc suspended Roberto’s proclamation. Yet, the Comelec was not unanimous. The dissenting members noted that Roberto’s right to due process was violated because he is not a party in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) and that the rules on suspension of proclamation is inapplicable in a proceeding to declare a nuisance candidate, thus: Given this May 12, 2022, in Manila, Philippines. Aggrieved, Roberto filed before the Comelec an Extremely Urgent Petition to direct the PBOC to proclaim him as the winning candidate having received the highest number of votes based on the complete transmission of election results. Roberto likewise filed a Special Entry of Appearance with Extremely Urgent Motion for Reconsideration Ad Cautelam in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) solely to lift the Order suspending his proclamation.Subsequently, Roberto withdrew the Petition and the entry of special appearance with Motion for Reconsideration. On May 31, 2022, Roberto filed a Petition for Certiorari, Prohibition, and Mandamus Ex Abudanti Ad Cautela before this Court docketed as G.R. No. 260650. Roberto questioned the suspension of his proclamation based on the “advanced copy” of the Comelec En Banc Order in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) where he-is not even a party. Roberto added that PBOC has the ministerial duty to proclaim the candidate with the highest votes. Roberto prayed for a Temporary Restraining Order against the Comelec Order dated May 12, 2022, and a mandatory injunction for the PBOC to reconvene and proclaim him as the winning candidate. In a Resolution elated June 7, 2022, the Comelec En Banc denied Frederico’s Motion for Reconsideration in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) because it was filed a day late. The Comelec noted that the Motion was sent through electronic mail beyond 5:00 p.m. on April 25, 2022, and is deemed filed the following day. At any rate, the Comelec affirmed the finding that Frederico is a nuisance candidate. The Comelec then directed that the votes of Frederico be credited to Romeo pursuant to the ruling in Dela Cruz v. Comelec that the votes received by a nuisance candidate should be credited to the legitimate candidate with the same surname, to wit: WHEREFORE, premises considered, the Motion for Reconsideration is hereby DENIED. Further, the Commission (En Banc) hereby ORDERS that the votes obtained by Respondent-Movant FREDERICO P. JALOSJOS be credited in favor of Petitioner ROMEO M. JALOSJOS, JR. In accordance with the result thereof, the candidate who obtained the highest number of votes shall be PROCLAIMED as the duly elected Representative of the 1st Congressional District of Zamboanga del Norte.

ISSUES:
The issue on the validity of the Resolution of the COMELEC Second Division has not yet been resolved by the COMELEC en banc. To stress again, at the time of the proclamation of respondent Locsin, the validity of the Resolution of the COMELEC Second Division was seasonably challenged by the petitioner in his Motion for Reconsideration. The issue was still within the exclusive jurisdiction of the COMELEC en banc to resolve. Hence, the HRET cannot assume jurisdiction over the matter. The instant case does not involve the election and qualification of respondent Locsin. A petition for quo warranto may be filed only on the grounds of ineligibility and disloyalty to the Republic of the Philippines. In the case at bar, neither the eligibility of the respondent Locsin nor her loyalty to the Republic of the Philippines is in question. There is no issue that she was qualified to run, and if she won, to assume office. Section 7. Petition to Deny Due Course to or Cancel a Certificate of Candidacy. — The procedure hereinabove provided shall apply to petitions to deny due course to or cancel a certificate of candidacy as provided in Section 78 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 881.

RULINGS:
The 1987 Constitution is explicit that the Court has the power to review any decision, order, or ruling of the Comelec through a petition for certiorari. Apropos is Article IX (A), Section 7 of the Constitution, to wit: Section 7. Each Commission shall decide by a majority vote of all its Members any case or matter brought before it within sixty days from the date of its submission for decision or resolution. A case or matter is deemed submitted for decision or resolution upon the filing of the last pleading, brief, or memorandum required by the rules of the Commission or by the Commission itself Unless otherwise provided by this Constitution or by law, any decision, order, or ruling of each Commission may be brought to the Supreme Court on certiorari by the aggrieved party within thirty days from receipt of a copy thereof. The Court interpreted the constitutional provision as limited to final orders, rulings, and decisions of the Comelec En Banc in the exercise of its adjudicatory or quasi-judicial powers. Verily, the Court has jurisdiction over the Petitions assailing the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022, that suspended Roberto’s proclamation, and its Resolution dated June 7, 2022, which affirmed Frederico’s declaration as a nuisance candidate. Contrary to the OSG and Romeo’s theory, the HRET has no appellate jurisdiction over rulings of the Comelec En Banc. The HRET lacks authority to decide on whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate, and the proper recourse is to timely file a petition for certiorari before this Court, thus: True, the Court in Limkaichong v. Comelec held that the proclamation of a winning candidate divests the Comelec of its “jurisdiction over matters pending before it at the time of the proclamation.” However, this statement must be read in the context of a pending case and not to final orders, rulings, and decisions of the Comelec En Banc in the exercise of its adjudicatory or quasi-judicial powers. Again, these matters may be reviewed only through a petition for certiorari before this Court. Otherwise, it would serve as a license to relitigate all issues already resolved by the Comelec on the unqualified interpretation that the HRET’s jurisdiction should be full and complete. In this case, it must be pointed out that Romeo’s proclamation as the winner is dependent on Comelec’s declaration of Frederico as a nuisance candidate. Unless the Comelec resolution is set aside, Romeo will be considered the winner because the votes of Frederico are presumed to be votes for Romeo. It is the Court, not the HRET, that is the proper body to review a Comelec Resolution. The HRET cannot declare a nuisance candidate and cancel a candidate’s CoC. This remedial vehicle is instituted in the Omnibus Election Code (OEC) and the Comelec Rules of Procedure and logically filed before elections. In other words, the OSG and Romeo’s argument that the HRET should take cognizance of the case would deprive Roberto of any remedy to challenge the election results. Consequently, before there is a valid or official taking of the oath it must be made (1) before the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and (2) in open session. Here, although she made the oath before Speaker Belmonte, there is no indication that it was made during plenary or in open session and, thus, it remains unclear whether the required oath of office was indeed complied with. More importantly, we cannot disregard a fact basic in this controversy — that before the proclamation of petitioner on 18 May 2013, the COMELEC En Banc had already finally disposed of the issue of petitioner’s lack of Filipino citizenship and residency via its Resolution dated 14 May 2013. After 14 May 2013, there was, before the COMELEC, no longer any pending case on petitioner’s qualifications to run for the position of Member of the House of Representatives. In Compliance with the Honorable Court’s Resolution dated March 8, 2023 in the above-captioned cases, I hereby certify that Mr. Romeo Jalosjos, Jr. has not taken an oath or affirmation of office with the Honorable Speaker of the House of Representatives in open session. Further, I certify that the Office of the Representative for the First District of Zamboanga Del Norte remains vacant due to the Status Quo Ante Order issued in these cases. However, in the interest of the people of the First District of Zamboanga Del Norte, the House of Representatives in its plenary session on November 7, 2022, designated Majority Leader Manuel Jose “Mannix” M. Dalipe as legislative caretaker. Hereto, attached for your reference is a [certified true] copy of page 52, House Journal No. 24 dated November 7, 2022. The “oath or affirmation” before the Speaker of the House in open session is not an empty ritual. To be sure, the third sentence of Rule II, Section 6 of the Rules of the House of Representatives provides for the significant consequential effects of the oath or affirmation before the Speaker in open session, viz.: Section 6. Oath or Affirmation of Members. – Members shall take their oath or affirmation collectively or individually before the Speaker in open session. The oath of office administered by the Speaker in open session to all Members present is a ceremonial affirmation of prior and valid oaths of office administered to them by duly authorized public officers. Following parliamentary precedents, Members take their oath before the Speaker in open session to enable them to enter into the performance of their functions and participate in the deliberations and other proceedings of the House. The rule has two scenarios – (1) oath before the Speaker of the House; and (2) oath before duly authorized public officers. In the first scenario, only an oath is required before the Speaker of the House and not an affirmation. In the second scenario, the oath of office before the Speaker of the House in open session is a ceremonial affirmation of a prior and valid oath before duly authorized public officers. In both cases, the oath before the Speaker of the House in open session will enable the members to “enter into the performance of their functions and participate in the deliberations and other proceedings of the House.” Here, Romeo did not take an oath before the Speaker of the House in open session which bars him from performing his functions and participating in the congressional deliberation. Thus, the required oath, as a ceremonial affirmation of a previous valid oath before duly authorized public officers, is not present. In addition, Romeo had not yet assumed office in view of the Status Quo Ante Order requiring the parties to observe the last, actual, peaceable, and uncontested state of things before the issuance of the assailed Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022 and Resolution dated June 7, 2022. The Court must stress that the controversy arose when the Comelec ordered the suspension of Roberto’s proclamation without allowing him to be heard (G.R. No. 260650) and is inextricably linked with Frederico’s declaration as a nuisance candidate and its consequences (G.R. No. 260952). The consolidated Petitions before this Court call for the determination of who should be proclaimed. In other words, the status quo to be maintained refers to the situation when neither Roberto nor Romeo was proclaimed. To hold that Roberto should be proclaimed in the interim is to defeat the very purpose of issuing the Status Quo Ante Order without the Court resolving the issues raised in these Petitions. The Status Quo Ante Order does not authorize any proclamation while the case is pending and renders any proclamation ineffective. In Garcia v. Mojica, the Court described a Status Quo Ante Order as follows: As explained by Justice Florenz D. Regalado, an authority on remedial law: Respondent Locsin submits that the COMELEC en banc has no jurisdiction to annul her proclamation. She maintains that the COMELEC en banc has been divested of jurisdiction to review the validity of her proclamation because she has become a member of the House of Representatives. Thus, she contends that the proper forum to question her membership to the House of Representatives is the House or Representatives Electoral Tribunal (HRET). We find no merit in these contentions. First. The validity of the respondent’s proclamation was a core issue in the Motion for Reconsideration seasonably filed by the petitioner. Respondent contends that having been proclaimed and having taken oath as representative of the 4th legislative district of Leyte, any question relative to her election and eligibility should be brought before the HRET pursuant to Section 17 of Article VI of the 1987 Constitution. We reject respondent’s contention. We also do not know if such order is forthcoming. x x x In a sense this is not an official copy of the order. x x x [T]his is a mere scrap of paper. Also the CHAIR[PERSON] acknowledges such fact because x x x if they cannot send the copy today, we will proceed with whatever action is right under the premises. x x x I vote to proceed with the proclamation of the winning candidate of the first district. However, the PBOC Chairperson dissented from the majority decision to proceed with the proclamation and called for a recess. Meanwhile, the Comelec Chairperson confirmed the authenticity of the suspension order through a phone call. The PBOC heed the directive, resumed the canvassing proceedings, and resolved to suspend the proclamation, to wit: [PBOC] CHAIR[PERSON]: Let’s resume. After I talked with the CHAIR[PERSON] of the Commission, he informed us, the members of the Board, that this copy is an official copy. And we are directed to implement the order. [PBOC] VICE CHAIR[PERSON]: If I may explain, I talked with the CHAIR[PERSON] and I confronted him whether this order is an official order of the Commission and he answered me that it is an official order of the Commission. So, I changed my earlier ruling and I vote for the suspension of the proclamation. [PBOC] CHAIR[PERSON]: So, the PBOC already ruled with finality that we will follow the order of the Commission En Banc not to proclaim Roberto Uy[,] Jr[.] and hence we will proceed with the proclamation of the 2nd district Member of the House of Representatives. In these circumstances, the Court finds it odd for the Comelec Chairperson to intervene in the proclamation absent a duly issued suspension order. The Comelec Chairperson should have ensured that the suspension order was urgently released pursuant to the rules instead of contacting the PBOC members. Similarly, it would be prudent if the PBOC inquired about the veracity of the “advanced copy” of the suspension order with the Comelec Clerk of Court who is tasked to “execute orders, resolutions, decisions and processes issued by the Commission.” Indeed, the guidelines in the proclamation of winning candidates allow the ”fastest means available such as, but not limited to phone call, sending of electronic mail, etc.” of the Comelec’s action over petitions to disqualify or cancel the CoC of a candidate. But this quick measure is premised on the fact that the Comelec had duly acted on the matter. In this case, however, the Comelec En Banc Order dated May 12, 2022, came after the PBOC suspended the proclamation. Obviously, the Comelec and the PBOC unnecessarily deferred the proclamation and went against the policy that winning candidates should be proclaimed without delay. The PBOC suspended the proclamation motu proprio when it gave effect to the “advanced copy” of the suspension order despite the glaring irregularities. In issuing the suspension order, the Comelec relied on its Resolution No. 9523, to wit: Section 8. Effect if Petition Unresolved. – If a Petition to Deny Due Course to or Cancel a Certificate of Candidacy is unresolved by final judgment on the day of elections, the petitioner may file a motion with the Division or Commission En Banc, as may be applicable, to suspend the proclamation of the candidate concerned, provided that the evidence for the grounds for denial to or cancel certificate of candidacy is strong. For this purpose, at least three (3) days prior to any election, the Clerk of the Commission shall prepare a list of pending cases and furnish all Commissioners copies of the said list. Section 5. Applicability of Rule 23. – Except for motu propio cases, Sections x x x 8 x x x of Rule 23 shall apply in proceedings against nuisance candidates. Verily, the pertinent election laws and rules require strong evidence to deny or cancel CoC as basis to suspend the proclamation of a winning candidate. The suspension of Roberto’s proclamation depends not only on whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate but also on the statistical probability of affecting the outcome of the elections. However, the Comelec En Banc issued the suspension order based on Romeo’s bare allegation. Here, Romeo failed to allege the percentage of election returns received and canvassed when be moved to suspend the proclamation of the leading candidate. Romeo did not even submit any document or certification from PBOC to support his prayer to suspend the proclamation. Here, the motu proprio suspension of proclamation denied Roberto his opportunity to be heard, which must be construed as a chance to explain one’s side or an occasion to seek a reconsideration of the complained action or ruling. Yet, the proclamation of Roberto was ordered suspended in a proceeding where he is not a party. In election cases, the requirement of due process is satisfied if the parties are given a fair and reasonable opportunity to clarify their respective positions. In Santos v. Comelec, the Court held that candidates who have no similarity in the name of the nuisance candidate are not real parties in interest and are mere “silent observers” in the nuisance case. However, nothing in Santos allows the suspension of proclamation of these silent observers without observance of due process of law. Evidently, the suspension order directly affected Roberto being the candidate who garnered the highest number of votes and who must be proclaimed without delay. As such, the Comelec should have at the very least notified and heard Roberto. Otherwise, the proclamation of a candidate may be unjustly suspended simply because of the pendency of the nuisance case. Worse, the manner of informing the PBOC of the advance copy of the suspension order led it to motu proprio suspend Roberto’s proclamation. Taken together, the Comelec gravely abused its power and violated the rules on basic fairness when it suspended the proclamation of Roberto without giving him the opportunity to be heard. On April 19, 2022, Frederico received via electronic mail the Comelec Second Division’s Resolution declaring him a nuisance candidate. Frederico had five days from notice to move for reconsideration or until April 24, 2022. Considering that the last day fell on a Sunday, the time shall not run until the next working day. Accordingly, Frederico sent the Motion for Reconsideration through electronic mail on April 25, 2022, at 6:23 p.m. The Comelec En Banc denied the Motion for being filed a day late following the rule that any pleading sent through electronic mail beyond 5:00 p.m. is deemed filed the following day. Nonetheless, the Comelec affirmed the finding that Frederico is a nuisance candidate. On this point, we cannot overemphasize that courts have always tried to maintain a healthy balance between the strict enforcement of procedural laws and the guarantee that every litigant be given the full opportunity for the just disposition of his cause. The Court has allowed several cases to proceed in the broader interest of justice despite procedural defects and lapses. These rulings are in keeping with the principle that rules of procedure are mere tools designed to facilitate the attainment of justice. Specifically, the Comelec Rules of Procedure provides that “[i]n the interest of justice and in order to obtain speedy disposition of all matters pending before the Commission, these rules and any portion thereof may be suspended by the Commission.” Here, the Comelec En Banc is deemed to have relaxed its procedures when it resolved the merits of the motion for reconsideration. In any event, the circumstances of the case merit the liberal application of the rules in the interest of substantial justice. The Comelec received Frederico’s Motion only more than an hour past 5:00 p.m. More importantly, the issue of whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate is determinative not only of the proper treatment of his votes but also as to the outcome of the elections. The grave injustice to Frederico is likewise not commensurate with his failure to comply with the rules. Thus, compelling reasons exist for the Court to finally settle the question of whether Frederico is a nuisance candidate. Other circumstances exist that belie bona fide intent. As correctly alleged by [Romeo], [Frederico] does not appear to have the support and capacity required to launch a credible campaign. The bare reliance on the support of his political party is insufficient. The Comelec’s observation begs the following questions: (1) what then was the basis to consider Frederico’s membership in the political party as insignificant? (2) are the allegations of Romeo sufficient to conclude lack of bona fide intent? Notably, the use of the phrase “does not appear” in the assailed Resolution and the absence of particular evidence showing that Frederico’s political party will not support him show that the Comelec’s ruling is speculative. The finding of the Comelec Second Division that Frederico is not a registered voter is likewise erroneous because the decision of the first-level court denying Frederico’s Petition to be included in the list of voters has not yet attained finality. Indeed, the Regional Trial Court subsequently reversed the decision and ordered the registration of Frederico as a voter. Accordingly, the Court should not allow the Comelec to perfunctorily invoke the evil caused by nuisance candidates without adequate proof to support a conclusion that a candidate is a nuisance in the first place. Here, the Comelec (Second Division) did not discuss how the inclusion of Frederico’s name in the ballots would prevent the faithful determination of the will of the electorate. The Comelec’s observation of an “inversely proportional relationship between identity of names and the required proof showing the absence of bona fide intent” is erroneous. The opinion is based on a misreading of the cited cases and does not excuse the Comelec from identifying why a particular candidacy would prevent the determination of the will of the people, viz.: On one end of this range are the cases of Bautista v. COMELEC and Zapanta v. COMELEC, where the candidates’ intended names on the ballots were totally identical save for their ballot number and party designation. In these decisions, the fact that the candidates were not publicly known by the name they sought to have in the ballot, when taken with even the slightest indicia that there was no bona fide intent to run, was deemed insufficient to declare them as nuisance candidates. More importantly, the statement in Dela Cruz and Santos that “the possibility of confusion in names of candidates if the names of the nuisance candidates remained on election day, cannot be discounted or eliminated, even under the automated voting system“ does not authorize the Comelec to automatically declare a candidate a nuisance “even with the slightest indicia that there was no bona fide intent to run.” The Comelec must clearly state in its resolution why a candidate falls under the definition of a nuisance candidate under Section 69 of the OEC. In this case, the Comelec rendered the determination of the bona fide intent to run for public office insignificant. The Comelec solely based its ruling on the alleged erroneous use of a nickname in declaring Frederico a nuisance without considering his membership in the political party, the importance of a CoC, the preceding campaign period, and the dissimilarities in the names appearing on the ballots. ACCORDINGLY, the consolidated Petitions are GRANTED. The Order dated May 12, 2022 and the Resolution dated June 7, 2022 of the Commission on Elections En Banc in SPA No. 21-224 (DC) are SET ASIDE on the ground of grave abuse of discretion. The proclamation of Romeo M. Jalosjos, Jr. arising from the execution of the assailed Order and Resolution is ANNULLED. The Commission on Elections is DIRECTED to proclaim Roberto T. Uy, Jr. as winner in the 2022 elections for the position of Zamboanga del Norte’s first district representative. The Status Quo Ante Order is LIFTED. The Decision shall be immediately executory.