FACTS:
Both accused were arrested and, when arraigned, entered a plea of not guilty. After due trial, the lower court found both accused guilty as charged and sentenced them to suffer the penalty of reclusion perpetua, with all the accessory penalties provided by law.  They were likewise ordered to pay jointly and severally to the heirs of the deceased the sum of (1) P50,000.00 by way of death indemnity; (2) P17,128.00 for actual funeral and other incidental expenses; (3) P20,000.00 by way of moral damages; and (4) P15,000.00 by way of exemplary damages, for a grand total of P102,128.00, without sub­sidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency.  The court further declared that, in the service of their sentence, they were entitled to full credit for the period of their preventive imprisonment, provided they had complied with the requirements of Article 29 of the Revised Penal Code, as amended. A motion for reconsideration was filed by accused Venancio Mercado, Jr., while accused Mario Rivera filed a notice of appeal.  The court a quo, in an amended decision dated July 15, 1991, acquitted Venancio Mercado, Jr. on the basis of reasonable doubt since appellant Rivera admitted sole liability for the killing and denied Mercado’s participation therein. The subject decision convicting herein appellant is now the subject of our appellate review. A:   When I returned back (sic) at El Gusto, I thought they were making a sign to ‘APPEAR’ (clapping of hands together) then, I noticed that they were already stabbing him, sir.” which she amplified on cross-examination in the following manner: A:   Venancio Mercado and Mario Rivera, sir. A:   No, sir. It would, at first impression, imply that appellant and his co-accused resorted to their ploy of making the “appear” sign to delude the victim into thinking that their intentions in talking to him were peaceful so that they could catch him unaware and vulnerable to an unexpected attack.  This may have been their purpose but, although they did succeed in fatally stabbing the victim, it would be too simplistic to forthwith conclude that there was treachery without considering the legal implications of the facts antecedent to this charade of appellant and his co-accused. A:   They called Remely Padios outside, sir. A:   It was intact in his waist, sir.”

ISSUES:
In this appeal, appellant assigns two errors supposedly committed by the court a quo which can, however, be subsumed into a single supposed error, that is, that the trial court erred in not giving weight and probative value to his testimony and convicting him as a consequence. He also calls the attention of the Court to the fact that Judge Efren N. Ambrosio, who rendered the questioned decision, took over the trial of the case only after the prosecution witnesses had already testified.  Appellant asserts that Judge Felipe R. Tumacder, who originally presided over the case, thereafter retired prior to the termination of the case, hence the judge who penned the decision had no opportunity to observe the demeanor of the witnesses nor to note the evasiveness of their answers. Said contention does not persuade.  While it is true that the trial judge who conducted the hearing could possibly be in a better position to ascertain the truth or the falsity of the testimonies of the witnesses, it does not necessarily follow that a judge who was not present during a part of the trial can not render a valid and just decision, since the latter can also rely on the transcribed stenographic notes taken during the trial as the basis of his decision. There is no dispute that on the night of October 19, 1989, Remely Padios died of stab wounds inflicted by Mario Rivera.  This has been admitted by the latter.  In view of such admission, the Court shall focus its analysis and evaluation of the case on whether or not the appellant had presented cogent, persuasive and compelling evidence to prove his claim that he acted under the justifying circumstance of self-defense.

RULINGS:
An evening intended to be a relaxing night out between two friends, herein accused-appellant Mario Rivera and his erstwhile co-accused Venancio Mercado, Jr., provided a tragic tableau for the senseless killing of an unwitting victim and the conviction of appellant for murder.  The case did not even have the saving grace of the inscrutability of fate; it was but another mundane episode involving the admixture of bravado and alcohol. In the present case, the number of wounds, the point of entry of the second wound, the position of the victim in relation to the assailant when the second wound was inflicted, as well as the fact that appellant did not sustain any injury, conjointly belie any pretension of self-defense.  The nature and the number of wounds inflicted by an assailant are constantly and unremittingly considered important incidents which disprove a plea of self-defense. “Q:  What did Remely Padios do, being stabbed by the two accused namely Mario Rivera and Venancio Mercado, Jr.? A:   They ran away, sir. A:   They pushed him, sir. A:   Mario Rivera, sir. If appellant honestly believed that his acts consisted of self-defense against the unlawful aggression of the victim, instead of immediately running away after stabbing the latter, he could and should have informed the people inside the restaurant of what had just transpired and sought aid for himself and Padios.  For that matter, he should also have reported the incident to the police, instead of escaping and avoiding the authorities until he was arrested.  His actuations cannot but put his case within the ambit of our jurisprudential doctrine that the flight of an accused discloses a guilty conscience. Another consideration that sustains the position of the prosecution and derails the proposition of the defense is the fact that any motive for the encounter lies on the part of appellant.  Rival testified that, prior to the incident, appellant Rivera and Mercado had created trouble by breaking bottles inside the restaurant.  The victim chided the two for creating trouble and brought them out of the establishment, as it was his duty to do so. Resenting the fact that they were admonished and ejected from the premises, it is not hard to conclude that both accused had the ill-conceived reason to take offense and recourse against the victim.  Consequently, and on the foregoing considerations, appellant’s theory of self-defense must be completely rejected. The information in the present case specifies evident premeditation and treachery as qualifying circumstances.  However, we agree with appellant that evident premeditation may not be appreciated against him.  The prosecution failed to present sufficient evidence as to how and when the plan to neutralize the victim was conceived or what time elapsed before it was carried out.  Evident premeditation cannot be appreciated in the absence of direct evidence of the planning and the preparation to kill, and that the execution of the criminal act was preceded by cool thought and reflection upon the resolution to carry out the criminal intent during a space of time sufficient to arrive at a calm judgment. Again, paragraph 16, Article 14 of the Revised Penal Code itself requires that the means, methods and forms employed, in order to constitute treachery, must have been directly and specially sought, adopted or used to insure both the accomplishment of the criminal design and its execution with impunity or without risk to the offender. Thus, in U.S. vs. Namit, it was held that where the aggressor failed to adopt a mode of attack intended to facilitate the perpetration of the killing without risk to himself, the circumstance that the attack was sudden and unexpected by the person attacked did not constitute the element of alevosia necessary to raise homicide to murder.  Where it was not established that the defendant in killing the deceased employed any means by which all defenses on the part of the latter should be impossible, there is no sufficient ground to establish alevosia and the killing should be classified as homicide.