FACTS:
She testified that on October 19, 1989, at around 11:45 p.m. El Gusto, while she was about three steps away, she saw accused Venancio Mercado, Jr. stab Remely Padios, a security guard of said establishment, with a weapon that looked like a fan knife. Afterwards, Mercado gave said weapon to appellant Rivera who then stabbed Remely Padios two times, prompting the latter to draw his gun. Rivera pushed Padios causing him to fall down and drop his gun. Mercado and Rivera then ran away from the area. When Emma Rival went near the victim, the latter asked her to look for his gun, which she found underneath the security guard’s table. She gave said gun to the manager of the restaurant, Mila Talosig, and both of them, together with a waiter of said restaurant, brought the victim to the Lyceum of Aparri Hospital. Expectedly, the defense gave an entirely different version of the incident. Appellant Rivera took the witness stand and testified that at about 11:00 p.m. of October 19, 1989, he and Mercado were at El Gusto Restaurant having a few drinks. Rivera decided to request Emma Rival, the lady singer of said establishment, to sing a particular song. Rivera approached the stage, which was about two feet high, and whispered the title of the song to the singer. Rivera, however, was “outbalanced” and his face accidentally touched Rival’s face, prompting the latter to slap him. Padios, the security guard of El Gusto, grabbed Rivera’s collar and dragged him out of the restaurant. Padios then pushed him and drew his gun. While Rivera was trying to stand up, Padios pointed his gun at him. Fearing for his life, Rivera “unconsciously” drew his knife and held the hand of Padios which was then holding a firearm. They grappled and when Rivera saw that Padios was about to fall, he released his grip and ran away. Pursuing his theory of self-defense, appellant tried to show that the deceased victim “pushed him” and “suddenly aimed his gun at (him).” Fearing for his life, so he claims, he “unconsciously drew (his) knife” and “thrust it at him.” Appellant further testified that after stabbing the deceased once, he fled from the scene.

ISSUES:
In this appeal, appellant assigns two errors supposedly committed by the court a quo which can, however, be subsumed into a single supposed error, that is, that the trial court erred in not giving weight and probative value to his testimony and convicting him as a consequence. The Court shall focus its analysis and evaluation of the case on whether or not the appellant had presented cogent, persuasive and compelling evidence to prove his claim that he acted under the justifying circumstance of self-defense.

RULINGS:
Going to the basics, we need merely note that the three requisites of self-defense are unlawful aggression, reasonable necessity of the means employed to prevent or repel it, and lack of sufficient provocation on the part of the person defending himself. We have consistently stressed that an accused who interposes self-defense must prove every element of this defense in order to avoid criminal liability for the killing or injury of the victim, and he must rely on the strength of his own defense and not on the weakness of the evidence for the prosecution for, even if the latter’s evidence is weak, it cannot be disbelieved after the accused himself admitted the killing. The testimony of appellant on how he supposedly stabbed the victim runs counter to the physical evidence in the case, as reflected in the medico-legal report. The medico-legal certificate, issued by the Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital with Dr. Errol Jesus de Yro as the attending physician, reveals that the victim suffered two (2) stab wounds: the first, “5 cms., 5th ICS line, (R) parasternal line,” and the second, “5 cms., (L) lumbar area w/ omental evisceration.” Dr. Romulo A. de Rivera, interpreting said certificate because of the unavailability of the attending physician, testified that the entry of the first wound was on the fifth right breastbone while that of the second wound was on the left lumbar area, left side of the back. In addition, Dr. De Rivera testified that when the second wound was inflicted, the assailant was behind the victim. Either wound, both lethal, could have caused the death of the victim. It will also be noted that appellant did not suffer any injury, although the victim was taller, had a bigger build and was allegedly already aiming his gun at appellant before said victim was stabbed. In the present case, the number of wounds, the point of entry of the second wound, the position of the victim in relation to the assailant when the second wound was inflicted, as well as the fact that appellant did not sustain any injury, conjointly belie any pretension of self-defense. The nature and the number of wounds inflicted by an assailant are constantly and unremittingly considered important incidents which disprove a plea of self-defense. If appellant honestly believed that his acts consisted of self-defense against the unlawful aggression of the victim, instead of immediately running away after stabbing the latter, he could and should have informed the people inside the restaurant of what had just transpired and sought aid for himself and Padios. For that matter, he should also have reported the incident to the police, instead of escaping and avoiding the authorities until he was arrested. We have perforce to recall the rule that evidence to be believed must not only proceed from the mouth of a credible witness but it must be credible in itself, and reject these blatant prevarications of Mercado. If appellant honestly believed that his acts consisted of self-defense against the unlawful aggression of the victim, instead of immediately running away after stabbing the latter, he could and should have informed the people inside the restaurant of what had just transpired and sought aid for himself and Padios. For that matter, he should also have reported the incident to the police, instead of escaping and avoiding the authorities until he was arrested. Evidence to be believed must not only proceed from the mouth of a credible witness but it must be credible in itself, and reject these blatant prevarications of Mercado. Appellant failed to establish any dubious motive on the part of witness Rival as to why she would give a fictional testimony against appellant. Indubitably, said witness, being a co-employee of victim Padios, would have more reason than any ordinary witness to make sure that the real killer of her co-worker be brought to justice. Absent the most compelling reason or motive, it is inconceivable why witness Rival would openly and publicly lie or concoct a story which would send an innocent man to jail. We agree with appellant that evident premeditation may not be appreciated against him. The prosecution failed to present sufficient evidence as to how and when the plan to neutralize the victim was conceived or what time elapsed before it was carried out. Evident premeditation cannot be appreciated in the absence of direct evidence of the planning and the preparation to kill, and that the execution of the criminal act was preceded by cool thought and reflection upon the resolution to carry out the criminal intent during a space of time sufficient to arrive at a calm judgment. We are likewise not inclined to hold that there was treachery in the killing of the victim. It is to be conceded, however, that such doctrinal pronouncements necessarily envision that each case must be judged in light of the attendant factual milieu thereof and, more importantly, under the overall concept and rationale for treachery which, if considered as a qualifying circumstance, would change the nature of the unlawful killing and call for the imposition of the highest penalty under the law. The victim was not completely unaware that herein appellant and Mercado posed a danger to him and which necessarily put him on his guard. He had forced them out of the restaurant and he was aware of their capacity and disposition to make trouble despite his presence therein as a security guard. Instead of going home, they loitered in the premises and later called him outside. He would be naive to believe that their intentions were anything but hostile considering their resentment and humiliation after being publicly required to leave the restaurant with the knowledge of other customers. In fact, when they were making the “appear” sign, the victim did not join them in the act. Also, we must not lose sight of the fact that the victim was duly armed with a .38 caliber revolver which is more than sufficient as a means of defense against a knife and that, as a security guard, he was trained not only to detect but also to anticipate the presence of danger. Paragraph 16, Article 14 of the Revised Penal Code itself requires that the means, methods and forms employed, in order to constitute treachery, must have been directly and specially sought, adopted or used to insure both the accomplishment of the criminal design and its execution with impunity or without risk to the offender. Thus, in U.S. vs. Namit, it was held that where the aggressor failed to adopt a mode of attack intended to facilitate the perpetration of the killing without risk to himself, the circumstance that the attack was sudden and unexpected by the person attacked did not constitute the element of alevosia necessary to raise homicide to murder. Where it was not established that the defendant in killing the deceased employed any means by which all defenses on the part of the latter should be impossible, there is no sufficient ground to establish alevosia and the killing should be classified as homicide. We cannot conclude that the accused acted with treachery since the means they employed did not eliminate all risks to themselves. As in the aforecited case of Asilo, the victim was not taken entirely unaware by the assault against him. Being adequately armed, neither can it be said that all means of defense on his part were impossible. Here, by the exercise of a reasonable degree of anticipatory caution and vigilance, the victim either could or should have been able to defend himself since he had all the opportunity to do so, and he could have prepared for or anticipated the attack. We, therefore, hold that under the foregoing disquisition and considering that doubts are resolved in favor of the accused since criminal justice inclines in appropriate cases to the milder form of liability, the crime was not attended by alevosia and should be considered as simple homicide without any modifying circumstance. WHEREFORE, the judgment appealed from is hereby MODIFIED by convicting the accused of the crime of homicide instead of murder, and imposing upon him an indeterminate sentence of ten (10) years of prision mayor, as minimum, to seventeen (17) years and four (4) months of reclusion temporal, as maximum. In all other respects, the aforesaid judgment of the court a quo is AFFIRMED.