FACTS:
Appellant Mario Rivera and Venancio Mercado, Jr. were charged before the Regional Trial Court, Branch VIII at Aparri, Cagayan, with the crime of murder in an information alleging the commission thereof as follows: “That on or about October 19, 1989 in the municipality of Aparri, province of Cagayan, and within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the said accused, Mario Rivera and Venancio Mercado, Jr., armed with a sharp pointed instrument, conspiring together and helping each other, with intent to kill, with evident premeditation and with treachery, did then and there wilfully, unlawfully and feloniously assault, attack and stab one Remely Padios, inflicting upon him wounds on his body which caused his death. That the accused Venancio Mercado, Jr. is a recidivist, he having been previously convicted by final judgment of Homicide in June, 1987, by this Honorable Court (Regional Trial Court, Aparri), Branch IX, in Criminal Case No. IX-498, entitled ‘People of the Philippines versus Venancio Mercado, Jr.’ for Homicide, which crime is embraced in the same title of the Revised Penal Code.” Both accused were arrested and, when arraigned, entered a plea of not guilty. After due trial, the lower court found both accused guilty as charged and sentenced them to suffer the penalty of reclusion perpetua, with all the accessory penalties provided by law.  They were likewise ordered to pay jointly and severally to the heirs of the deceased the sum of (1) P50,000.00 by way of death indemnity; (2) P17,128.00 for actual funeral and other incidental expenses; (3) P20,000.00 by way of moral damages; and (4) P15,000.00 by way of exemplary damages, for a grand total of P102,128.00, without sub­sidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency.  The court further declared that, in the service of their sentence, they were entitled to full credit for the period of their preventive imprisonment, provided they had complied with the requirements of Article 29 of the Revised Penal Code, as amended. A motion for reconsideration was filed by accused Venancio Mercado, Jr., while accused Mario Rivera filed a notice of appeal.  The court a quo, in an amended decision dated July 15, 1991, acquitted Venancio Mercado, Jr. on the basis of reasonable doubt since appellant Rivera admitted sole liability for the killing and denied Mercado’s participation therein. The subject decision convicting herein appellant is now the subject of our appellate review. The principal facts of the case for the prosecution were established by lone witness Emma Rival.  She testified that on October 19, 1989, at around 11:45 p.m., she took a brief respite from her work as a singer of El Gusto Restaurant and Folk House at Aparri, Cagayan and went to buy merienda at Lansi’s Store located adjacent to said restaurant.  On her way back to El Gusto, while she was about three steps away, she saw accused Venancio Mercado, Jr. stab Remely Padios, a security guard of said establishment, with a weapon that looked like a fan knife.  Afterwards, Mercado gave said weapon to appellant Rivera who then stabbed Remely Padios two times, prompting the latter to draw his gun.  Rivera pushed Padios causing him to fall down and drop his gun.  Mercado and Rivera then ran away from the area.  When Emma Rival went near the victim, the latter asked her to look for his gun, which she found underneath the security guard’s table.  She gave said gun to the manager of the restaurant, Mila Talosig, and both of them, together with a waiter of said restaurant, brought the victim to the Lyceum of Aparri Hospital. Expectedly, the defense gave an entirely different version of the incident. Appellant Rivera took the witness stand and testified that at about 11:00 p.m. of October 19, 1989, he and Mercado were at El Gusto Restaurant having a few drinks.  Rivera decided to request Emma Rival, the lady singer of said establishment, to sing a particular song.  Rivera approached the stage, which was about two feet high, and whispered the title of the song to the singer.  Rivera, however, was “outbalanced” and his face accidentally touched Rival’s face, prompting the latter to slap him.  Padios, the security guard of El Gusto, grabbed Rivera’s collar and dragged him out of the restaurant.  Padios then pushed him and drew his gun.  While Rivera was trying to stand up, Padios pointed his gun at him.  Fearing for his life, Rivera “unconsciously” drew his knife and held the hand of Padios which was then holding a firearm.  They grappled and when Rivera saw that Padios was about to fall, he released his grip and ran away. As earlier stated, while the two accused were still inside the restaurant they started creating trouble by breaking bottles, such that the victim had to forcibly escort them out of the place. When witness Emma Rival went to buy her merienda at Lansi’s Store much later, she saw Rivera there while Mercado was with the victim at the guard post, and they were obviously joined thereafter by Rivera. When Rival later left the store to return to El Gusto, these were what she witnessed: A:   They called Remely Padios outside, sir. A:   They were facing each other, sir. A:   Yes, sir. A:   It was intact in his waist, sir.” From the foregoing facts, we can readily deduce that the victim was not completely unaware that herein appellant and Mercado posed a danger to him and which necessarily put him on his guard.  He had forced them out of the restaurant and he was aware of their capacity and disposition to make trouble despite his presence therein as a security guard.  Instead of going home, they loitered in the premises and later called him outside.  He would be naive to believe that their intentions were anything but hostile considering their resentment and humiliation after being publicly required to leave the restaurant with the knowledge of other customers.  In fact, when they were making the “appear” sign, the victim did not join them in the act.  Also, we must not lose sight of the fact that the victim was duly armed with a .38 caliber revolver which is more than sufficient as a means of defense against a knife and that, as a security guard, he was trained not only to detect but also to anticipate the presence of danger.

ISSUES:
There is no dispute that on the night of October 19, 1989, Remely Padios died of stab wounds inflicted by Mario Rivera.  This has been admitted by the latter.  In view of such admission, the Court shall focus its analysis and evaluation of the case on whether or not the appellant had presented cogent, persuasive and compelling evidence to prove his claim that he acted under the justifying circumstance of self-defense.

RULINGS:
An evening intended to be a relaxing night out between two friends, herein accused-appellant Mario Rivera and his erstwhile co-accused Venancio Mercado, Jr., provided a tragic tableau for the senseless killing of an unwitting victim and the conviction of appellant for murder.  The case did not even have the saving grace of the inscrutability of fate; it was but another mundane episode involving the admixture of bravado and alcohol. Going to the basics, we need merely note that the three requisites of self-defense are unlawful aggression, reasonable necessity of the means employed to prevent or repel it, and lack of sufficient provocation on the part of the person defending himself. We have consistently stressed that an accused who interposes self-defense must prove every element of this defense in order to avoid criminal liability for the killing or injury of the victim, and he must rely on the strength of his own defense and not on the weakness of the evidence for the prosecution for, even if the latter’s evidence is weak, it cannot be disbelieved after the accused himself admitted the killing. Pursuing his theory of self-defense, appellant tried to show that the deceased victim “pushed him” and “suddenly aimed his gun at (him).” Fearing for his life, so he claims, he “unconsciously drew (his) knife” and “thrust it at him.”  Appellant further testified that after stabbing the deceased once, he fled from the scene. The testimony of appellant on how he supposedly stabbed the victim runs counter to the physical evidence in the case, as reflected in the medico-legal report.  The medico­-legal certificate, issued by the Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital with Dr. Errol Jesus de Yro as the attending physician, reveals that the victim suffered two (2) stab wounds:  the first, “5 cms., 5th ICS line, (R) parasternal line,” and the second, “5 cms., (L) lumbar area w/ omental evisceration.” Dr. Romulo A. de Rivera, interpreting said certificate because of the unavailability of the attending physician, testified that the entry of the first wound was on the fifth right breastbone while that of the second wound was on the left lumbar area, left side of the back. “Q:  What did Remely Padios do, being stabbed by the two accused namely Mario Rivera and Venancio Mercado, Jr.? A:   He took his gun, sir. A:   They ran away, sir. A:   They pushed him, sir. A:   Mario Rivera, sir. A:   He fell, sir.” If appellant honestly believed that his acts consisted of self-defense against the unlawful aggression of the victim, instead of immediately running away after stabbing the latter, he could and should have informed the people inside the restaurant of what had just transpired and sought aid for himself and Padios.  For that matter, he should also have reported the incident to the police, instead of escaping and avoiding the authorities until he was arrested.  His actuations cannot but put his case within the ambit of our jurisprudential doctrine that the flight of an accused discloses a guilty conscience. Appellant failed to establish any dubious motive on the part of witness Rival as to why she would give a fictional testimony against appellant.  Indubitably, said witness, being a co-employee of victim Padios, would have more reason than any ordinary witness to make sure that the real killer of her co-worker be brought to justice.  Absent the most compelling reason or motive, it is inconceivable why witness Rival would openly and publicly lie or concoct a story which would send an innocent man to jail. The information in the present case specifies evident premeditation and treachery as qualifying circumstances.  However, we agree with appellant that evident premeditation may not be appreciated against him.  The prosecution failed to present sufficient evidence as to how and when the plan to neutralize the victim was conceived or what time elapsed before it was carried out.  Evident premeditation cannot be appreciated in the absence of direct evidence of the planning and the preparation to kill, and that the execution of the criminal act was preceded by cool thought and reflection upon the resolution to carry out the criminal intent during a space of time sufficient to arrive at a calm judgment. A:   When I returned back (sic) at El Gusto, I thought they were making a sign to ‘APPEAR’ (clapping of hands together) then, I noticed that they were already stabbing him, sir.” which she amplified on cross-examination in the following manner: A:   Venancio Mercado and Mario Rivera, sir. A:   No, sir. A:   They stabbed him, sir. A:   When they were in the act of making the sign of appear, they suddenly stab(bed) him, sir. It would, at first impression, imply that appellant and his co-accused resorted to their ploy of making the “appear” sign to delude the victim into thinking that their intentions in talking to him were peaceful so that they could catch him unaware and vulnerable to an unexpected attack.  This may have been their purpose but, although they did succeed in fatally stabbing the victim, it would be too simplistic to forthwith conclude that there was treachery without considering the legal implications of the facts antecedent to this charade of appellant and his co-accused. Turning to doctrines of earlier vintage but which are still consistently followed as authoritative precedents, we are reminded that treachery is not to be presumed, but must be proved as conclusively as the act it qualifies. The same degree of proof to dispel any reasonable doubt is required before treachery may be considered either as an aggravating or qualifying circumstance. Further, it has long been declared that the qualifying circumstance of treachery must be based on some positive conclusive proof and not only upon hypothetical facts or on mere suppositions or presumptions. Again, paragraph 16, Article 14 of the Revised Penal Code itself requires that the means, methods and forms employed, in order to constitute treachery, must have been directly and specially sought, adopted or used to insure both the accomplishment of the criminal design and its execution with impunity or without risk to the offender. Thus, in U.S. vs. Namit, it was held that where the aggressor failed to adopt a mode of attack intended to facilitate the perpetration of the killing without risk to himself, the circumstance that the attack was sudden and unexpected by the person attacked did not constitute the element of alevosia necessary to raise homicide to murder.  Where it was not established that the defendant in killing the deceased employed any means by which all defenses on the part of the latter should be impossible, there is no sufficient ground to establish alevosia and the killing should be classified as homicide. WHEREFORE, the judgment appealed from is hereby MODIFIED by convicting the accused of the crime of homicide instead of murder, and imposing upon him an indeterminate sentence of ten (10) years of prision mayor, as minimum, to seventeen (17) years and four (4) months of reclusion temporal, as maximum.  In all other respects, the aforesaid judgment of the court a quo is AFFIRMED.