FACTS:
Respondent bank and heirs of Odilao, represented by his heir entered into a mortgaged loan agreement covered by a parcel of land.  The came when Oilao failed to comply with the terms of the mortgaged which lead to the foreclosure of the property. Odilao moved to have the instrument reformed for it being a contract of adhesion and restrictive against petitioner Odilao.  The case was filed before the respondent bank before the Pasig Trial Court arguing that the contract  specifically  stipulated that the venue of any action arising from the contract shall be in Pasig. Odilao filed his opposition that that the venue should be where the place where the real property  or any part thereof is located.  The court dismissed the case rationating that the venue was improperly laid and that the contract is restrictive against the  petitioner Odilao.  The case was elevated to the  Court of Appeals who affirmed that the decision of the trial court is correct, hence the instant petition

ISSUES:
Whether or not, the court erred in dismissing the case because the venue of the action was improperly laid.

RULINGS:
The court erred in affirming the dismissal of the case base on improperly laid venue. SEC. 3. Venue of actions against nonresidents. - If any of the defendants does not reside and is not found in the Philippines, and the action affects the personal status of the plaintiff, or any property of said defendant located in the Philippines, the action may be commenced and tried in the court of the place where the plaintiff resides, or where the property or any portion thereof is situated or found.  SEC. 4. When Rule not applicable. - This Rule shall not apply -  (b) Where the parties have validly agreed in writing before the filing ofthe action on the exclusive venue thereof.  According to the law, action  involving real property, the venue shall be the court that has jurisdiction where the real property or any part thereof is situated except when there is a written exclusivity of venue was executed prior to the filing of any case. Here, the place where the real property is situated is found in Cagayan de Oro hence the venue  should be in Regional Trial Court of Davao City.  While there is a stipulation as to the venue, the same is restrictive and thus not controlling in the case at bar. Based therefrom, the general rule is that the venue of real actions is the court which has jurisdiction over the area wherein the real property involved, or a portion thereof, is situated; while the venue of personal actions is the court which has jurisdiction where the plaintiff or the defendant resides, at the election of the plaintiff. As an exception, jurisprudence in Legaspi v. Rep. Ofthe Phils. Instructs that the parties, thru a written instrument, may either introduce another venue where actions arising from such instrument may be filed, or restrict the filing of said actions in a certain exclusive venue, viz.:  The parties, however, are not precluded from agreeing in writing on an exclusive venue, as qualified by Section 4 of the same rule. Written stipulations as to venue may be restrictive in the sense that the suit may be filed only in the place agreed upon, or merely permissive in that the parties mav file their suit not only in the place agreed upon but also in the places fixed by law. As in any other agreement, what is essential is the ascertainment ofthe intention of the parties respecting the matter.  As regards restrictive stipulations on venue,  Jurisprudence instructs that it must be shown that such  Stipulation is exclusive. In the absence of qualifying or  Restrictive words, such as "exclusively," "waiving for this  Purpose any other venue," "shall only" preceding the Designation of venue, "to the exclusion of the other courts,"  Or words of similar import,the stipulation should be  Deemed as merely an agreement on an additional forum.