FACTS:


ISSUES:


RULINGS:
Petition for certiorari against the order of the Court of First Instance of Manila dated 13 May 1966 (in Criminal Case No. 82116) granting the petition for bail of therein accused Jose Simborio y Salonga on a P20,000.00 bond. On 22 April 1966, the accused filed a motion for his provisional release on bail, claiming that the evidence of his guilt was not strong and, considering his personal circumstances and social standing, there is no probability that he would flee.  Thereupon, the motion was heard on 29 April 1966, during which hearing the prosecution presented its evidence, consisting of the ante mortem statement of the victim, Avelino Concepcion, Jr., given to Patrolman J. Sta. Maria at the Philippine General Hospital to the effect that accused Simborio was in the company of gunwielder Sonny Catelo when he (Concepcion) was shot; the statement of alleged eyewitness Ruben Sumalde y Olisco that when Sonny Catelo shot Concepcion, Jr. the accused was holding the victim’s left arm; and the statement of Manolito Gascon, the driver of the car used by Catelo and company, to the effect that the accused was with them at least before the incident happened.  Upon the other hand, the accused contended that at the time of the incident he was taking an examination at the Mapua Institute of Techno­logy.  To support this allegation, he presented the examination paper and the testimonies of his instructor and the latter’s assistant that the said examination paper could not have been submitted if movant did not take the test on the date in question. There is record, however, that while the trial fiscal manifested his intention to introduce witnesses to amplify the exhibits already adduced by the prosecution, such manifestation was in effect withdrawn when he offered to submit the matter for resolution of the court on the evidence already presented, provided the accused would admit said exhibits — which condition the accused accepted.  The transcript of the notes of the proceedings in the court below reads as follows: Neither is it correct to say that the respondent judge gave more credence to the alibi of the accused rather than to the statements made by the victim and an eye­witness to the incident, thereby showing bias in favor of the accused.  It must be remembered that the question raised for the determination of the lower court was not the guilt or innocence of the accused of the crime charged, but whether or not the evidence of his guilt is strong.  In taking cognizance of the fact that the state­ments of the victim and witness Sumalde, that the accused was present at the scene of the incident and even held the arm of the victim when the latter was shot at, is contradicted by the examination paper and the testimonies of the instructor and his assistant tending to establish the presence of the accused in school at the time when the shooting occurred, the respondent judge did not rule on the ad­missibility and probative value of said evidence.  It was merely held that with the issue of the whereabouts of the accused when the crime was committed having thus become contentious, the evidence of guilt of the accused (so far presented) can not be considered strong.