FACTS:
Assailed in this petition for review on certiorari are the Decision dated November 24, 2014 and the Resolution dated May 29, 2015 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CR No. 35293, which upheld the Decision dated September 6, 2012 of the Regional Trial Court of Tayug, Pangasinan, Branch 52 (RTC) in Criminal Case Nos. T-5144 and T-5145, finding petitioner Christopher Fianza a.k.a. “Topel” (Fianza) guilty beyond reasonable doubt of two (2) counts of violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of Republic Act No. (RA) 7610, otherwise known as the “Special Protection of Children Against Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act.” Fianza was charged with two (2) counts of violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610 under two (2) Informations dated April 6, 2011 filed before the RTC. The prosecution’s version of the incidents are as follows: Sometime in July 2010, AAA, who was then 11 years old, was called by Fianza to his house and thereupon, was asked to wash his clothes. After AAA was finished with the laundry, Fianza asked her to go with him to the kamalig. Thereat, they proceeded to the second floor where Fianza removed his pants and briefs, lied down, and ordered AAA to hold his penis and masturbate him. After ejaculating, Fianza put on his clothes, and gave P20.00 to AAA who, thereafter, went home. On November 30, 2010, while AAA was home, Fianza called her to his house, and asked her to clean the same. After she was done sweeping the floor, they proceeded to the second floor of the kamalig. Thereat, Fianza again removed his pants and briefs, lied down, and ordered AAA to fondle his penis. After the deed, he gave P20.00 to AAA who, thereafter, went home. After the second incident, AAA related the matter to her cousin, CCC, who, in turn, told BBB, AAA’s mother, who reported the matter to the police. For his part, Fianza interposed the defense of denial and alibi. He claimed that he lived with his uncle in Andalasi, Pangasinan (Andalasi), while the rest of his family resided in Sapinit, Pangasinan (Sapinit), and were neighbors with AAA. He averred that in July 2010, he went to Sapinit to gamble all night, and went to his parents’ house the following morning to sleep before going home to Andalasi. As for the November 30, 2010 incident, he maintained that he was in Andalasi drinking with his friends as he had just sold a carabao. The next day, he went to get the carabao that he sold, and bought more liquor. He proceeded to Sapinit to have another drinking session that lasted until December 4, 2010.

ISSUES:
The essential issue for the Court’s resolution is whether or not the CA correctly upheld Fianza’s conviction.

RULINGS:
The elements of Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC are: (a) the offender commits any act of lasciviousness or lewdness; (b) the lascivious act is done under any of the following circumstances: (i) by using force or intimidation; (ii) when the offended party is deprived of reason or otherwise unconscious; or (iii) when the offended party is under twelve (12) years of age; and (c) the offended party is another person of either sex. On the other hand, sexual abuse, as defined under Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610 has three (3) elements: (a) the accused commits an act of sexual intercourse or lascivious conduct; (b) the said act is performed with a child exploited in prostitution or subjected to other sexual abuse; and (c) the child is below eighteen (18) years old. In the present case, the existence of all the elements of Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC, as well as the first and third elements of sexual abuse under Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610, remains undisputed. Records disclose that on two (2) occasions in July 2010 and on November 30, 2010, Fianza induced AAA, an 11-year-old minor, to hold his penis and masturbate him. The only point of dispute is with regard to the existence of the second element of sexual abuse, i.e., whether or not the lascivious conduct was performed on a child subjected to other sexual abuse. With the foregoing parameters considered, the Court finds that Fianza’s acts were attended by coercion or influence within the contemplation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. It is undisputed that AAA was only 11 years old at the time of the incidents, hence, considered a child under the law. Section 3 (a), Article I of RA 7610 defines children in this wise: Case law states that a child, such as AAA in this case, is presumed to be incapable of giving rational consent to any lascivious act. In Malto v. People, the Court explained: Records likewise indicate that Fianza was about 35 years old at the time of the commission of the offense, or 24 years older than AAA, more or less. The age disparity between them clearly placed Fianza in a stronger position over AAA which enabled him to wield his will on the latter. However, Fianza assails his conviction for the prosecution’s failure: (a) to specify in the Information in Criminal Case No. T-5144 the date of the commission of the offense; and (b) to indicate in the information in both cases that the complained acts were performed with a child exploited in prostitution or subjected to other sexual abuse in violation of his right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusations against him. SEC. 6. Sufficiency of complaint or information. – A complaint or information is sufficient if it states the name of the accused; the designation of the offense given by the statute; the acts or omissions complained of as constituting the offense; the name of the offended party; the approximate date of the commission of the offense; and the place where the offense was committed. SEC. 11. Date of commission of the offense. – It is not necessary to state in the complaint or information the precise date the offense was committed except when it is a material ingredient of the offense. The offense may be alleged to have been committed on a date as near as possible to the actual date of its commission. (Emphasis and underscoring supplied) Conformably with these provisions, when the date given in the complaint is not of the essence of the offense, it need not be proven as alleged; thus, the complaint will be sustained if the proof shows that the offense was committed at any date within the period of the statute of limitations and before the commencement of the action. In this case, Fianza had been fully apprised of the charges against him since the Informations stated the approximate date of the commission of the offense to be “sometime during the month of July 2010.” Indeed, the precise date and time of the incidents are not among the elements of sexual abuse under Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. It is likewise well-settled that it is sufficient that the acts or omissions constituting the offense be stated in the information in ordinary and concise language and not necessarily in the language used in the statute, albeit in terms sufficient to enable a person of common understanding to know what offense is being charged and for the court to pronounce judgment. In the instant case, the Informations not only referred to the specific section of RA 7610 that was violated, but also stated that: (a) AAA was an 11-year-old minor at the time of the offense; and (b) Fianza committed lascivious conduct by forcing AAA to masturbate his penis. Force or intimidation in cases involving prosecutions for Rape and Acts of Lasciviousness is defined as “power, violence or constraint exerted upon or against a person.” In People v. Maceda, the Court explained the standards for evaluating the force or intimidation employed in rape, which equally applies to Acts of Lasciviousness as well as violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610: It is not necessary that the force and intimidation employed in accomplishing it be so great or of such character as could not be resisted. It is only necessary that the force or intimidation be sufficient to consummate the purpose which the accused had in mind. The intimidation must be judged in the light of the victim’s perception and judgment at the time of the commission of the crime, and not by any hard and fast rule. (Emphasis and underscoring supplied) The allegation that Fianza committed lascivious conduct by forcing AAA to masturbate his penis was sufficient to apprise him of the nature of the criminal act with which he was charged to enable him to prepare his defense. Contrary to his protestations, the Informations sufficiently alleged the second element of sexual abuse, albeit not employing the exact language of the law, i.e., that the lewd acts being complained of were performed with a child exploited in prostitution or subjected to other sexual abuse. Notably, Fianza failed to refute AAA’s claim that she was compelled to do as he instructed because he threatened to humiliate her and her family. In Amployo v. People, a case involving a similar prosecution for lascivious conduct committed on an eight-year-old minor, the Court held that intimidation need not necessarily be irresistible, especially in the case of young girls, thus: It is not hard to imagine 11-year-old AAA being intimidated and cowed into silence and submission by her neighbor, a full grown adult male old enough to be her parent, with threat of humiliation, should she not give in to his dastardly desires. She is still a child not capable of fully understanding or knowing the import of her actions. Verily, in almost all cases of sexual abuse, the credibility of the victim’s testimony is crucial in view of the intrinsic nature of the crime where only the persons involved can testify as to its occurrence. Hence, the Court accords a high degree of respect to the assessment of the trial court which is in the best position to observe the declarations and demeanor of the witnesses, and evaluate their credibility, even more so when the same is affirmed by the CA, as in this case. Accordingly, the Court finds the prosecution to have sufficiently established Fianza’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt for Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC in relation to Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. Applying the Indeterminate Sentence Law, and absent any mitigating or aggravating circumstances, he is hereby sentenced to suffer the penalty of imprisonment for an indeterminate period of twelve (12) years and one (1) day of reclusion temporal in its minimum period, as minimum, to fifteen (15) years, six (6) months and twenty (20) days of reclusion temporal in its medium period, as maximum. However, in line with recent jurisprudence, the Court modifies the awards of civil indemnity and moral damages, and hereby orders Fianza to pay the amounts of P15,000.00 as fine, P20,000.00 as civil indemnity, and P15,000.00 as moral damages, for each count, plus legal interest thereon at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the finality of this judgment until full payment. WHEREFORE, the petition is DENIED. The Decision dated November 24, 2014 and the Resolution dated May 29, 2015 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CR No. 35293 are hereby SET ASIDE and a new one is entered finding petitioner Christopher Fianza a.k.a. “Topel” (Fianza) GUILTY beyond reasonable doubt of two (2) counts of Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the Revised Penal Code in relation to Section 5 (b), Article III of Republic Act No. 7610. Fianza is sentenced to suffer the penalty of imprisonment of twelve (12) years and one (1) day of reclusion temporal in its minimum period, as minimum, to fifteen (15) years, six (6) months, and twenty (20) days of reclusion temporal in its medium period, as maximum, and is ordered to pay AAA the amounts of P15,000.00 as fine, P20,000.00 as civil indemnity, and P15,000.00 as moral damages, for each count, plus legal interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the finality of this judgment until full payment.