FACTS:
The instant case stemmed from an Information filed before the RTC charging petitioner with the crime of Illegal Sale of Dangerous Drugs, defined and penalized under Section 5, Article II of RA 9165. In a Judgment dated January 24, 2017, the RTC found petitioner guilty beyond reasonable doubt of the crime charged, and accordingly, sentenced her to suffer the penalty of life imprisonment and to pay a fine in the amount of P500,000.00. Aggrieved, petitioner appealed to the Court of Appeals (CA). In a Resolution dated February 15, 2018, the CA dismissed the appeal for failure to file an appellant's brief pursuant to Section 8, Rule 124 of the Rules of Court (Rules). On March 15, 2018, the RTC Decision became final and executory, and in a Resolution dated August 3, 2018, the CA ordered the issuance of an Entry of Judgment. On October 25, 2018, the Public Attorney's Office - Special and Appealed Cases Service, on behalf of petitioner, filed an Entry of Appearance with Motion to Recall the Entry of Judgment and Reinstate the Accused-Appellant's Appeal. Petitioner prayed for the relaxation of procedural rules and for her appeal to be reinstated and given due course, explaining that the failure to file an appellant's brief was due to the gross negligence of her previous counsel, Atty. Amelito A. Ruiz (Atty. Ruiz), who unjustifiably failed to file the said pleading despite repeatedly moving for extension of time to do so. In a Resolution dated February 7, 2019, the CA denied the motion for lack of merit, holding that there was no persuasive reason to liberally apply the procedural rules on appeal. Undaunted, petitioner moved for reconsideration, which was denied in a Resolution dated July 8, 2019.

ISSUES:
The issue for the Court's resolution is whether or not the CA correctly dismissed petitioner's appeal based on procedural grounds.

RULINGS:
Assailed in this petition for review on certiorari are the Resolutions dated February 7, 2019 and July 8, 2019 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CR-HC No. 09062 which denied the motion of petitioner Fredierose Tamboa y Laday (petitioner) to recall entry of judgment and to reinstate her appeal seeking review of the Judgment dated January 24, 2017 of the Regional Trial Court of Sanchez Mira, Cagayan, Branch 12 (RTC) in Criminal Case No. 3712-S-5, finding her guilty beyond reasonable doubt of violation of Section 5, Article II of Republic Act No. (RA) 9165, otherwise known as the "Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002." At the outset, it bears stressing that, as a rule, "a final and executory judgment can no longer be attacked by any of the parties or be modified, directly or indirectly, even by the highest court of the land." However, "the Court has relaxed this rule in order to serve substantial justice considering (a) matters of life, liberty, honor or property, (b) the existence of special or compelling circumstances, (c) the merits of the case, (d) a cause not entirely attributable to the fault or negligence of the party favored by the suspension of the rules, and (e) a lack of any showing that the review sought is merely frivolous and dilatory x x x," all of which obtain in the instant case. Guided by the foregoing considerations, the Court finds it proper to recall the Entry of Judgment dated March 15, 2018 and reinstate petitioner's appeal, as will be explained hereunder. In appeals of criminal cases before the CA, the appellant's failure to timely file his or her brief is a ground for the dismissal of an appeal. Nevertheless, it should be observed that "if a rigid application of the rules of procedure will tend to obstruct rather than serve the broader interests of justice in light of the prevailing circumstances of the case, such as where strong considerations of substantive justice are manifest in the petition, the Court may relax the strict application of the rules of procedure in the exercise of its equity jurisdiction." In this case, it appears that the appeal interposed by petitioner before the CA has ostensible merit owing to the alleged lapses of the arresting officers in duly complying with the chain of custody rule. Hence, the Court deems it proper to relax the technical rules of procedure in order to afford petitioner the fullest opportunity to establish the merits of her appeal. Accordingly, the Entry of Judgment made in this case should be recalled and the case be remanded to the CA for resolution of the appeal on its merits. Petitioner is given a non-extendible period of thirty (30) days upon receipt of this Decision to file her appellant's brief with the CA. WHEREFORE, the petition is GRANTED. The Resolutions dated February 7, 2019 and July 8, 2019 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CR-HC No. 09062 are hereby REVERSED and SET ASIDE, and the Entry of Judgment dated March 15, 2018 is RECALLED. The case is REMANDED to the CA for resolution of the appeal on its merits. Petitioner is DIRECTED to file her appellant's brief therewith within a non-extendible period of thirty (30) days from receipt of this Decision.