FACTS:
Plantersbank was the mortgagee of nineteen (19) parcels of land situated in San Juan, Metro Manila (subject properties), covered by Transfer Certificates of Title (TCT) Nos. 11057-R to 11075-R, under a Mortgage dated February 28, 2003 executed by the borrower-mortgagor, Kwong-on Trading Corporation (KTC), to secure a P14,000,000.00 loan. KTC defaulted in the payment of its loan, constraining Plantersbank to extra­ judicially foreclose the mortgaged properties and, in the process, emerged as the highest bidder in the public auction sale held on May 5, 2010. KTC likewise failed to redeem the subject properties, which led to the cancellation of TCT Nos. 11057-R to 11075-R, and the issuance of TCT Nos. 012-2011000149 to 012-2011000167 in the name of Plantersbank. Thereafter, Plantersbank applied for a writ of possession, which was granted by the RTC in a Decision dated January 6, 2012 (January 6, 2012 Decision). The corresponding writ of possession was issued on February 2, 2012 and served, together with the Notice to Vacate and the January 6, 2012 Decision, to petitioner AQA Global Construction Inc. (AQA), which occupied the subject properties at the time. AQA filed a Manifestation and Motion before the RTC, seeking leave of court to intervene in the case and to be excluded from the implementation of the writ of possession, claiming that its possession: (a) was adverse to that of KTC; and (b) stemmed from a ten (10) year contract of lease commencing on March 10, 2009, with petitioner Je-an Supreme Builders and Sales Corporation (Je-An), which had bought the subject property from Little Giant Realty Corporation (Little Giant), the registered owner of the subject properties. On the other hand, Je-An filed an Affidavit of Third Party Claim to stay the implementation of the writ of possession, alleging that its right to possess the subject properties was: (a) separate and distinct from that of KTC; and (b) derived from a Contract to Sell dated January 15, 2003 (January 15, 2003 Contract to Sell) executed by Little Giant.


ISSUES:
The essential issue for the Court's resolution is whether or not the CA erred in finding that the RTC gravely abused its discretion in staying the implementation of the writ of possession against AQA and Je-An.

RULINGS:
Assailed in these consolidated petitions for review on certiorari are the Decision dated July 18, 2013 and the Resolution dated March 10, 2014 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. SP No. 127219, which set aside the Orders dated July 16, 2012 and September 25, 2012 issued by the Regional Trial Court of Pasig City, Branch 160 (RTC) in LRC Case No. R-7509, excluding the petitioners in these cases from the implementation of the writ of possession in favor of respondent Planters Development Bank (Plantersbank). After hearing AQA's motion, the RTC issued an Order dated July 16, 2012 excluding AQA and Je-An from the implementation of the writ of possession in favor of Plantersbank, ruling that they are third parties which did not derive title from KTC. In a Decision dated July 18, 2013, the CA ruled that the RTC gravely abused its discretion in staying the implementation of the writ of possession against AQA and Je-An. Undaunted, AQA and Je-An separately moved for reconsideration which were, however, denied in a Resolution dated March 10, 2014; hence, the instant petitions. The general rule is that after the lapse of the redemption period, the purchaser in a foreclosure sale becomes the absolute owner of the property purchased who is entitled to the possession of the said property. Upon ex parte petition, it is ministerial upon the trial court to issue the writ of possession in his favor. The exception, however, is provided under Section 33, Rule 39 of the Rules, which applies suppletorily to extrajudicial foreclosures of real estate mortgages. Under the said provision of law, the possession of the mortgaged property may be awarded to a purchaser in the extrajudicial foreclosure unless a third party is actually holding the property adversely to the judgment debtor: For the exception to apply, however, the property need not only be possessed by a third party, but also held by him adversely to the judgment obligor - such as that of a co-owner, agricultural tenant or usufructuary, who possess the property in their own right and not merely the successor or transferee of the right of possession of, or privy to, the judgment obligor. In this case, petitioners' claim of right of possession over the subject properties is not analogous to any of the foregoing as to render such possession adverse to the judgment obligor, KTC, under legal contemplation. In the first place, Je-An's claimed ownership over the subject properties is based on the January 15, 2003 Contract to Sell, which is legally insufficient to transfer title in its favor absent a deed of conveyance duly executed by the vendor, Little Giant, and, at most, affords it a mere inchoate right over the said properties. Secondly, while records show that KTC acquired its rights and interests over the subject properties from Little Giant through the February 24, 2003 Deed of Assignment, Je-An, the vendee under the January 15, 2003 Contract to Sell of the same properties, was privy to the conveyance to KTC since its representative, i.e., Achurra, was the one who executed the said deed of assignment in favor of KTC in behalf of Little Giant. Thirdly, it appears that at the time KTC executed the Mortgage in favor ofPlantersbank on February 28, 2003, titles over the subject properties were already in its name sans any annotation of the January 15, 2003 Contract to Sell in favor of Je-An. Moreover, the records are bereft of showing that at the time Plantersbank consolidated its title over the foreclosed properties in 2011, any adverse claim based on said contract to sell and/or the purported rescission on August 1, 2003 of the February 24, 2003 Deed of Assignment between Little Giant (as represented by Achurra) and KTC had been registered by Je-An, Achurra or Little Giant on KTC's titles. Clearly, the stay of the implementation of the writ of possession prayed for by Je-An on the basis of such inchoate right would becloud the integrity and derogate the indefeasibility of the torrens title issued in favor of Plantersbank as a confirmed owner, which the Court cannot allow. Corollorily, the enforcement of the writ of possession cannot also be stayed in favor of AQA which merely derived its possession from Je-An through an unregistered contract of lease. Under Section 51 of PD No. 1529, otherwise known as the Land Registration Decree, "no deed, mortgage, lease or other voluntary instrument, except a will purporting to convey or affect registered land shall take effect as a conveyance or bind the land" until its registration. In the present case, AQA's unregistered lease with Je-An is, thus, not binding on Plantersbank. Consequently, Je-An and AQA cannot be considered third parties holding the subject properties adversely to KTC, the defaulting debtor­ mortgagor. Resultantly, the general rule, and not the exception, applies to the instant petitions, rendering it the mandatory and ministerial duty of the RTC to issue the writ of possession in favor of Plantersbank as the confirmed owner, and of the Sheriff to implement the said writ. WHEREFORE, the petitions are DENIED. The Decision dated July 18, 2013 and the Resolution dated March 10, 2014 of the Court of Appeals in CA-GR. SP No. 127219 are hereby AFFIRMED.
