FACTS:
The Issue Before the Court The essential issue for the Court resolution is whether or not the CA erred in finding that the RTC gravely abused its discretion in staying the implementation of the writ of possession against AQA and Je-An. The Court Ruling The petition lacks merit. The general rule is that after the lapse of the redemption period the purchaser in a foreclosure sale becomes the absolute owner of the property purchased who is entitled to the possession of the said property. Upon ex parte petition it is ministerial upon the trial court to issue the writ of possession in his favor. The exception however is provided under Section 33 Rule 39 of the Rules which applies suppletorily to extrajudicial foreclosures of real estate mortgages. Under the said provision of law the possession of the mortgaged property may be awarded to a purchaser in the extrajudicial foreclosure unless a third party is actually holding the property adversely to the judgment debtor: In sum while the Court finds the CA to have erred in ruling that the RTC was not clothed with the supervisory authority to determine the nature of the possession of Je-An and AQA it correctly ruled against the propriety of staying the implementation of the writ of possession against them.

ISSUES:
The CA Ruling

RULINGS:
Plantersbank was the mortgagee of nineteen 19 parcels of land situated in San Juan Metro Manila subject properties covered by Transfer Certificates of Title TCT Nos. 11057-R to 11075-R under a Mortgage dated February 28 2003 executed by the borrower-mortgagor Kwong-on Trading Corporation KTC to secure a P14 000 000.00 loan. KTC defaulted in the payment of its loan constraining Plantersbank to extra­ judicially foreclose the mortgaged properties and in the process emerged as the highest bidder in the public auction sale held on May 5 2010. KTC likewise failed to redeem the subject properties which led to the cancellation of TCT Nos. 11057-R to 11075-R and the issuance of TCT Nos. 012-2011000149 to 012-2011000167 in the name of Plantersbank. Thereafter Plantersbank applied for a writ of possession which was granted by the RTC in a Decision dated January 6 2012 January 6 2012 Decision . The corresponding writ of possession was issued on February 2 2012 and served together with the Notice to Vacate and the January 6 2012 Decision to petitioner AQA Global Construction Inc. AQA which occupied the subject properties at the time. AQA filed a Manifestation and Motion before the RTC seeking leave of court to intervene in the case and to be excluded from the implementation of the writ of possession claiming that its possession: a was adverse to that of KTC; and b stemmed from a ten 10 year contract of lease commencing on March 10 2009 with petitioner Je-an Supreme Builders and Sales Corporation Je-An which had bought the subject property from Little Giant Realty Corporation Little Giant the registered owner of the subject properties. On the other hand Je-An filed an Affidavit of Third Party Claim to stay the implementation of the writ of possession alleging that its right to possess the subject properties was: a separate and distinct from that of KTC; and b derived from a Contract to Sell dated January 15 2003 January 15 2003 Contract to Sell executed by Little Giant. Plantersbank opposed AQA motion contending that AQA cannot be considered a third party possessing the subject properties adversely against KTC because the latter derived its right from Je-An through a Deed of Assignment of the subject properties dated February 24 2003 February 24 2003 Deed of Assignment executed by its representative Antonio Achurra Jr. Achurra . Plantersbank further averred that the lease between Je-An and AQA cannot bind it since the same was not registered and annotated on the titles over the subject properties. AQA filed its Reply maintaining that its right to possess the subject properties did not come from KTC but from Je-An. It further averred that KTC has no right over the subject properties considering the subsequent rescission of the February 24 2003 Deed of Assignment by Little Giant and KTC. After hearing AQA motion the RTC issued an Order dated July 16 2012 excluding AQA and Je-An from the implementation of the writ of possession in favor of Plantersbank ruling that they are third parties which did not derive title from KTC. It held that Plantersbank proper recourse is to file a separate action questioning their possession. Dissatisfied Plantersbank moved for reconsideration which was however denied in an Order dated September 25 2012. It then elevated the matter to the CA through a petition for certiorari under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court Rules . Undaunted AQA and Je-An separately moved for reconsideration which were however denied in a Resolution dated March 10 2014; hence the instant petitions. In the first place Je-An claimed ownership over the subject properties is based on the January 15 2003 Contract to Sell which is legally insufficient to transfer title in its favor absent a deed of conveyance duly executed by the vendor Little Giant and at most affords it a mere inchoate right over the said properties. Secondly while records show that KTC acquired its rights and interests over the subject properties from Little Giant through the February 24 2003 Deed of Assignment Je-An the vendee under the January 15 2003 Contract to Sell of the same properties was privy to the conveyance to KTC since its representative Achurra was the one who executed the said deed of assignment in favor of KTC in behalf of Little Giant. Such is apparent from the Brief Statement of Claims and Defenses in the pre-trial brief dated September 10 2010 filed by Je-An and Achurra in Civil Case Nos. 69973 and 69988 before the same RTC – the consolidated cases for: a annulment of contract to sell and deed of assignment cancellation of titles annulment of mortgage accounting and damages filed by Diokno as representative of Little Giant and for his own behalf against Je-An and Achurra; and b specific performance and damages filed by Je-An represented by Achurra against Diokno – and is inconsistent with Je-An claim of adverse possession against KTC in this case. Thirdly it appears that at the time KTC executed the Mortgage in favor ofPlantersbank on February 28 2003 titles over the subject properties were already in its name sans any annotation of the January 15 2003 Contract to Sell in favor of Je-An. Moreover the records are bereft of showing that at the time Plantersbank consolidated its title over the foreclosed properties in 2011 any adverse claim based on said contract to sell and/or the purported rescission on August 1 2003 of the February 24 2003 Deed of Assignment between Little Giant as represented by Achurra and KTC had been registered by Je-An Achurra or Little Giant on KTC titles.