FACTS:
Petitioner Hadja Rawiya Suib’s (Suib) husband, Saab Hadji Suib (deceased), was the owner of a parcel of land with a total area of 12.6220 hectares, located in Sapu Masla, Malapatan, Sarangani Province, covered by OCT No. P-19714, which he acquired through a duly notarized Deed of Absolute Sale from Sagap Hadji Taib on 14 December 1981. The RTC dismissed the case on the ground of res judicata or bar by former judgment. It turned out that it was not the first time that Suib filed a criminal case of qualified theft against Ebbah. Suib previously filed a criminal case of qualified theft against Ebbah before the Municipal Trial Court (MTC) of Malapatan, docketed as Criminal Case No. 1793-M, which the MTC dismissed. Ebbah then filed the present case against Suib before the Provincial Agrarian Reform Adjudication Board (PARAB) in Region XI, docketed as Case No. XI-0330-SC-90, on 31 January 1990. The case is for Immediate Reinstatement and Damages. Finding the absence of a tenancy relationship between Suib and Ebbah, the PARAB, in a Decision dated 10 September 1993, dismissed the case for lack of merit. An examination of the records reveal (sic) that Plaintiff-Appellant was on the land of Respondent-Appellee since 1963. It must be remembered that at the time Respondent-Appellee rejected Plaintiff-Appellant on 30 March 1990, the latter had already harvested thousands of coconuts and had already converted twenty-five (25) sacks of copra. There was also a sharing of the produce of the land between the parties. Undoubtedly, the requisites for the establishment of tenancy relation are present in this case. Moreover, the fact that they did not at all question his tenancy over the land in question for quite several years, there is an implied recognition or consent to the establishment of a tenancy relationship between the parties. Acting on the various supplements filed by Suib, the Court of Appeals, in a Resolution dated 9 October 2007, dismissed the petition for failure of Suib to submit the DARAB Decision pursuant to Section 7, Rule 43 in relation to Section 1(g) of Rule 50 of the Rules of Court. Suib’s Motion for Reconsideration with Compliance was likewise denied in a Resolution dated 26 February 2008. The dispositive portion of the Resolution reads: On November 26, 2007, this Court issued a Resolution directing the private respondent to file a comment on the Motion for Reconsideration with Compliance filed by petitioner within a period often (10) days from receipt of notice of the said resolution. The same was received by the private respondent on November 8, 2007. On January 24, 2008, private respondent filed with this Court his Comment thru registered mail and a copy thereof was received by this Court on January 31, 2008. A perusal of petitioner’s Motion for Reconsideration with Compliance reveals that the directive of this Court May 10, 2006 requiring her to submit the DARAB decision was not complied with. Accordingly, the Motion for Reconsideration with compliance is hereby denied. The petition is devoid of merit.

ISSUES:


RULINGS:
Before us is a Petition for Certiorari under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court assailing the Court of Appeals Resolutions dated 9 October 2007 and 26 February 2008, in CA-G.R. SP No. 00985-MIN, for having been issued with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction. 1. Declaring Emong Ebbah a tenant of Hadji Rawiya Suib who is hereby ordered to respect and maintain Ebbah in the peaceful possession and cultivation of the subject landholding. The motion for reconsideration was likewise denied in a Resolution dated 21 December 1998. To appeal the adverse Decision, Suib filed a Petition for Review under Rule 43 of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure before the Court of Appeals on 7 April 2006. Without giving due course to the petition, the Court of Appeals issued a Resolution dated 10 May 2006, with the following directives: D) REQUIRE petitioner to REMIT, within a non-extendible period of five (5) days from notice, the amount of P1,180.00 representing the balance in the payment of the docket fees for petitions with prayer for TRO and/or WPI; E) REQUIRE DARAB to show proof that copy of its Resolution dated December 21, 1998 denying petitioner’s Motion for Reconsideration in DARAB Case No. 5402 was sent to petitioner and/or counsel of record; Section 1. Grounds for dismissal of appeal. — An appeal may be dismissed by the Court of Appeals, on its own motion or on that of the appellee, on the following grounds: x x x x A reading of the aforesaid provisions reveals that the requirement in Section 1, Rule 50 in relation to Section 7, Rule 43 of the Rules of Court is mandatory and jurisdictional. Thus, Suib’s failure to attach the required copy of the appealed DARAB Decision is a sufficient ground for the dismissal of her appeal. One glaring fact that cannot escape us is that the petition for review filed before the Court of Appeals, which assailed the Decision and Resolution of the DARAB, was filed beyond the reglementary period. As borne by the records, Suib received a copy of the DARAB Decision and Resolution on 5 June 1998 and 21 December 1998, respectively, and it was only after eight (8) long years since the assailed DARAB Decision and Resolution were received when Suib filed an appeal to the Court of Appeals on 7 April 2006. Without doubt, eight (8) years is beyond the reglementary period within which to file an appeal from a decision of the DARAB to the Court of Appeals as provided in Rule 43, Section 4 of the Rules of Court, which mandates that appeals should be filed within fifteen (15) days from notice of the judgment: Section 4. Period of appeal. — The appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days from notice of the award, judgment, final order or resolution, or from the date of its last publication, if publication is required by law for its effectivity, or of the denial of petitioner’s motion for new trial or reconsideration duly filed in accordance with the governing law of the court or agency a quo. Only one (1) motion for reconsideration shall be allowed. Upon proper motion and the payment of the full amount of the docket fee before the expiration of the reglementary period, the Court of Appeals may grant an additional period of fifteen (15) days only within which to file the petition for review. No further extension shall be granted except for the most compelling reason and in no case to exceed fifteen (15) days. (n) Upon receipt of the adverse DARAB Decision in 1998, it was incumbent upon Suib to exercise due diligence to keep or in case of loss, to secure another copy of the Decision from the DARAB. Time and again, this Court has reminded suitors to be diligent in record keeping. Thus, the DARAB cannot be faulted for Suib’s negligence. For its part, DARAB served Suib a copy of its Decision long before Suib filed an appeal. As soon as a litigant receives a copy of an adverse decision, it is incumbent upon the losing litigant to request a copy from the court or tribunal should he/she lose a copy of the same. After all, losing litigants should be mindful of the legal remedies available to them. As the appeal is procedurally infirm, it is within the discretion of the appellate court to dismiss the same. As long as the lower court acts judiciously and within the bounds of the law, the Court has no discretion to question the lower court’s judgment in dismissing the appeal. Once more we find occasion to reiterate this Court’s pronouncement in De Liano v. Court of Appeals, where we held: Some may argue that adherence to these formal requirements serves but a meaningless purpose, that these may be ignored with little risk in the smug certainty that liberality in the application of procedural rules can always be relied upon to remedy the infirmities. This misses the point. We are not martinets; in appropriate instances, we are prepared to listen to reason, and to give relief as the circumstances may warrant. However, when the error relates to something so elementary as to be inexcusable, our discretion becomes nothing more than an exercise in frustration. It comes as an unpleasant shock to us that the contents of an appellant’s brief should still be raised as an issue now. There is nothing arcane or novel about the provisions of Section 13, Rule 44. The rule governing the contents of appellants’ briefs has existed since the old Rules of Court, which took effect on July 1, 1940, as well as the Revised Rules of Court, which took effect on January 1, 1964, until they were superseded by the present 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure. The provisions were substantially preserved, with few revisions. And, even if we consider this petition as rightfully one under Rule 65, we say that is should likewise be dismissed as no grave abuse of discretion was shown. A petition for certiorari under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court is limited to correction of errors of jurisdiction or grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction. In order to constitute grave abuse of discretion, Suib must prove that the lower court acted in a capricious and whimsical exercise of judgment tantamount to lack of jurisdiction. “Mere abuse of discretion is not enough. It must be grave abuse of discretion as when the power is exercised in an arbitrary or despotic manner by reason of passion or personal hostility, and must be so patent and so gross as to amount to an evasion of a positive duty or to a virtual refusal to perform the duty enjoined or to act at all in contemplation of law.” Evidently, the Court of Appeals acted within the bounds of law as the dismissal of the appeal was based on Section 1(g), Rule 50 in relation to Section 7, Rule 43 of the Rules of Court. Although the decision of the Court of Appeals, which dismissed the petition, did not mention Suib’s failure to file the present petition within the reglementary period pursuant to Rule 43, Section 4 of the Rules of Court, still, the Court of Appeals was correct in dismissing the same based on Section 1(g), Rule 50 in relation to Section 7, Rule 43 of the same Rule. Far from it, the dismissal of Suib’s appeal was neither arbitrary nor despotic.