FACTS:
This case is about the proof required to establish the domicile of a reinstated Filipino citizen who seeks election as governor of a province. The Facts and the Case The sole issue presented in this case is whether or not the COMELEC acted with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction in ruling that Jalosjos failed to present ample proof of a bona fide intention to establish his domicile in Ipil Zamboanga Sibugay. The Court s Ruling Four. Jalosjos won and was proclaimed winner in the 2010 gubernatorial race for Zamboanga Sibugay. The Court will respect the decision of the people of that province and resolve all doubts regarding his qualification in his favor to breathe life to their manifest will.

ISSUES:
To hold that Jalosjos has not establish a new domicile in Zamboanga Sibugay despite the loss of his domicile of origin Quezon City and his domicile of choice and by operation of law Australia would violate the settled maxim that a man must have a domicile or residence somewhere.

RULINGS:
Petitioner Rommel Jalosjos was born in Quezon City on October 26 1973. He migrated to Australia in 1981 when he was eight years old and there acquired Australian citizenship. On November 22 2008 at age 35 he decided to return to the Philippines and lived with his brother Romeo Jr. in Barangay Veteran s Village Ipil Zamboanga Sibugay. Four days upon his return he took an oath of allegiance to the Republic of the Philippines resulting in his being issued a Certificate of Reacquisition of Philippine Citizenship by the Bureau of Immigration. On September 1 2009 he renounced his Australian citizenship executing a sworn renunciation of the same in compliance with Republic Act 9225. From the time of his return Jalosjos acquired a residential property in the same village where he lived and a fishpond in San Isidro Naga Zamboanga Sibugay. He applied for registration as a voter in the Municipality of Ipil but respondent Dan Erasmo Sr. the Barangay Captain of Barangay Veteran s Village opposed the same. Acting on the application the Election Registration Board approved it and included Jalosjos name in the Commission on Elections COMELEC s voters list for Precinct 0051F of Barangay Veterans Village Ipil Zamboanga Sibugay. On November 28 2009 Jalosjos filed his Certificate of Candidacy COC for Governor of Zamboanga Sibugay Province for the May 10 2010 elections. Erasmo promptly filed a petition to deny due course or to cancel Jalosjos COC on the ground that the latter made material misrepresentation in the same since he failed to comply with 1 the requirements of 9225 and 2 the one-year residency requirement of the Local Government Code. After hearing the Second Division of the COMELEC ruled that while Jalosjos had regained Philippine citizenship by complying with the requirements of 9225 he failed to prove the residency requirement for a gubernatorial candidate. He failed to present ample proof of a bona fide intention to establish his domicile in Ipil Zamboanga Sibugay. On motion for reconsideration the COMELEC En Banc affirmed the Second Division s decision ruling that Jalosjos had been a mere guest or transient visitor in his brother s house and for this reason he cannot claim Ipil as his domicile. The Issue Presented It is inevitable under these guidelines and the precedents applying them that Jalosjos has met the residency requirement for provincial governor of Zamboanga Sibugay. One. The COMELEC appears hasty in concluding that Jalosjos failed to prove that he successfully changed his domicile to Zamboanga Sibugay. The COMELEC points out that since he was unable to discharge the burden of proving Zamboanga Sibugay to be his rightful domicile it must be assumed that his domicile is either Quezon City or Australia. But it is clear from the facts that Quezon City was Jalosjos domicile of origin the place of his birth. It may be taken for granted that he effectively changed his domicile from Quezon City to Australia when he migrated there at the age of eight acquired Australian citizenship and lived in that country for 26 years. Australia became his domicile by operation of law and by choice. On the other hand when he came to the Philippines in November 2008 to live with his brother in Zamboanga Sibugay it is evident that Jalosjos did so with intent to change his domicile for good. He left Australia gave up his Australian citizenship and renounced his allegiance to that country. In addition he reacquired his old citizenship by taking an oath of allegiance to the Republic of the Philippines resulting in his being issued a Certificate of Reacquisition of Philippine Citizenship by the Bureau of Immigration. By his acts Jalosjos forfeited his legal right to live in Australia clearly proving that he gave up his domicile there. And he has since lived nowhere else except in Ipil Zamboanga Sibugay. WHEREFORE the Court GRANTS the petition and SETS ASIDE the Resolution of the COMELEC Second Division dated February 11 2010 and the Resolution of the COMELEC En Banc dated May 4 2010 that disqualified petitioner Rommel Jalosjos from seeking election as Governor of Zamboanga Sibugay. SO ORDERED.