FACTS:
Petitioner, represented by her son, Ariel Odilao, filed before the trial court the instant complaint, praying, inter alia, that it render a decision declaring that the subject loan and mortgage agreements which she and her husband, Tyrone Victor G. Odilao, executed in favor of respondent bank, are contracts of adhesion and therefore, must be reformed to reflect their true and mutual intention, viz.:

ISSUES:
Challenged in this Petition for Review on Certiorari are the Decision and the Resolution of the Court of Appeals (CA) Cagayan de Oro City Station in CA-G.R. CV No. 04749-MIN. The impugned Decision affirmed the Order of Branch 17 of the Regional Trial Court of Davao City, dismissing the Complaint for reformation of mortgage, nullity of foreclosure, damages, and attorney’s fees with temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction filed by Lucille Odilao (petitioner) against Union Bank of the Philippines (respondent bank) and Atty. Natasha M. Go-De Mesa, the Register of Deeds of Davao City. Upon the other hand, the assailed Resolution denied petitioner’s motion for reconsideration thereof. All the same, in the now-assailed Decision, the CA denied petitioner’s appeal and affirmed the orders of the trial court. Her subsequent motion for reconsideration thereof was given short shrift by the CA in the equally impugned Resolution.

RULINGS:
The facts of the case are uncomplicated. Indubitably, the venue stipulations found in the subject instruments are indeed restrictive in nature. The provisions of the said promissory note are clear that any action arising out of or in connection with Promissory Note shall only be in Pasig City or Metro Manila at the sole option of the defendant bank. Also, the Real Estate Mortgage, indisputably provides that any action arising out of the said mortgage shall either be in the place where the property is located or in Pasig City at the absolute option of the [respondent] Bank. While it may be true that the subject property is located in Davao City, the present action cannot still be heard and adjudicated in this Court absent the express manifestation of the mortgagee [respondent bank] of its option to have the case litigated in Davao City. Notably, the provisions as to venue of the Real Estate Mortgage holds no doubt that the venue of actions arising out of the said mortgage is at the option of [respondent bank]. Notably, in instituting the instant action, the [petitioners] merely seek, inter alia, the declaration of the loan and mortgage agreements as contracts of adhesions, thus, praying for the reformation of the loan and mortgage instruments to reflect the true and mutual intention of the parties of the same. In view of the foregoing, it can be concluded that based on agreement of the parties as stated in the subject instruments, this Court is not the proper venue to hear and decide the instant action. Petitioner moved for the reconsideration of the foregoing Order but the trial court denied her plea in the Order dated December 28, 2016. The Petition is impressed with merit in light of the fact that the dismissal of the complaint on the ground of improperly laid venue was erroneous. The Court explicates. Nevertheless, while the facts in Briones and this case are dissimilar, the Court’s disquisition in the former on the matter of venue is instructive, viz.: SECTION 1. Venue of real actions. — Actions affecting title to or possession of real property, or interest therein, shall be commenced and tried in the proper court which has jurisdiction over the area wherein the real property involved, or a portion thereof, is situated. Forcible entry and detainer actions shall be commenced and tried in the municipal trial court of the municipality or city wherein the real property involved, or a portion thereof, is situated. SEC. 2. Venue of personal actions. — All other actions may be commenced and tried where the plaintiff or any of the principal plaintiffs resides, or where the defendant or any of the principal defendants resides, or in the case of a non-resident defendant where he may be found, at the election of the plaintiff. SEC. 3. Venue of actions against nonresidents. — If any of the defendants does not reside and is not found in the Philippines, and the action affects the personal status of the plaintiff, or any property of said defendant located in the Philippines, the action may be commenced and tried in the court of the place where the plaintiff resides, or where the property or any portion thereof is situated or found. Based therefrom, the general rule is that the venue of real actions is the court which has jurisdiction over the area wherein the real property involved, or a portion thereof, is situated; while the venue of personal actions is the court which has jurisdiction where the plaintiff or the defendant resides, at the election of the plaintiff. As an exception, jurisprudence in Legaspi v. Rep. of the Phils. instructs that the parties, thru a written instrument, may either introduce another venue where actions arising from such instrument may be filed, or restrict the filing of said actions in a certain exclusive venue, viz.: Section 8. Venue. – The venue of all suits and actions arising out of or in connection with this Mortgage shall be Pasig City or in the place where any of the Mortgaged properties are located, at the absolute option of the Mortgagee, the parties hereto waiving any other venue. Such being the case, petitioner’s complaint, which was filed before the Regional Trial Court of Davao City where the mortgaged property is located, should not have been dismissed as the same complied with the venue stipulation stated in the Real Estate Mortgage. Upon this point, the Court is perplexed as to why the CA affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of petitioner’s complaint when it itself pronounced that “the venue stipulation in the Real Estate Mortgage should be controlling.” On the other hand, the trial court, mistakenly interpreted the phrase “at the absolute option of the Mortgagee” to mean that “the present action cannot still be heard and adjudicated in this court absent the express manifestation of the mortgagee [respondent bank] of its option to have this case litigated in Davao City.” Moreover, it must be emphasized that the restrictive stipulation on venue only refers to the geographical location and should not in any way curb the right of a party to file a case. This being so, to interpret the phrase “at the absolute option of the Mortgagee” to mean that petitioner should have inquired first from respondent bank which venue it preferred, i.e., Pasig City or Davao City, before she filed the instant action, would mean that she would be left at the mercy of the bank, as she would still have to wait for its response before she could exercise her right to litigate. At most, such phrase takes significance only when it is respondent bank which would file the case. WHEREFORE, the Petition for Review of Certiorari is hereby GRANTED. The Decision dated July 17, 2019 and the Resolution dated October 9, 2020 of the Court of Appeals Cagayan De Oro City Station, in CA-G.R. CV No. 04749-MIN, are REVERSED and SET ASIDE. The Complaint for reformation of mortgage, nullity of foreclosure, damages, and attorney’s fees with temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction filed by petitioner Lucille B. Odilao, represented by Ariel B. Odilao, against respondent Union Bank of the Philippines and Atty. Natasha M. Go-De Mesa, the Register of Deeds of Davao City, before Branch 77 of the Regional Trial Court of Davao City and docketed as Civil Case No. R-DVO-16-01024-CV is REINSTATED. The trial court is further ordered to proceed with the disposition of the case with dispatch.