FACTS:
The Issue Before the Court The sole issue for the Court resolution is whether or not the respondents may be lawfully ejected from the subject property. The Court Ruling The petition is meritorious. In this case respondents failed to establish their prior and continued possession of the subject property after its sale in favor of petitioner in 1981. On the contrary they even admitted in their answer to the complaint that petitioner exercised dominion over the same by instituting caretakers and leasing portions thereof to third persons. Suffice it to state that possession in the eyes of the law does not mean that a man has to have his feet on every square meter of the ground before he is deemed in possession. Thus finding petitioner assertion to be well-founded the MCTC properly adjudged petitioner to have prior possession over the subject property as against Sabandal-Herzenstiel who never claimed ownership or possession thereof.

ISSUES:
The MCTC Ruling

RULINGS:
Petitioner Philippine Tourism Authority now Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Zone Authority petitioner is the owner of the subject property and other parcels of land located in Brgy. Basdiot Moalboal Cebu since February 12 1981 when it bought the same from Tri-Island Corporate Holdings Inc. Tri-Island . It had then been in actual physical continuous and uninterrupted possession of the subject property and had declared the same for taxation purposes. Sometime in 1997 however respondents Pedro Tapales Luis Tapales Romeo Tapales Tapaleses and Sabandal-Herzenstiel respondents by force strategy and stealth entered into the 2 940 square meter portion of the subject property on which they proceeded to cut down some coconut trees introduced improvements and fenced the area. Petitioner made demands to vacate the last of which was through a letter dated January 5 1998 which respondents ignored prompting the filing of a forcible entry complaint against them before the 12th Municipal Circuit Trial Court of Moalboal-Alcantara-Badian-Alegria Cebu MCTC docketed as Civil Case No. 118 on March 18 1998. In their Answer with Counterclaim the Tapaleses acknowledged that the subject property had already been sold by its administrator Josefina Abrenica to Tri-Island. They however claimed that the sale was tainted with force and intimidation and hence void including the subsequent transactions covering the same property. Notwithstanding the sale they remained in actual and physical possession of the subject property and even introduced improvements thereon. Consequently absent any proof of prior possession on the part of petitioner they claimed that the forcible entry complaint must necessarily be dismissed. On April 13 2007 the MCTC rendered a Decision MCTC Decision ordering respondents to: a vacate the subject property and remove all the improvements introduced therein; b pay petitioner jointly and severally the amount of P2 000.00 as monthly rental from the date of judicial demand March 18 1998 until they have effectively vacated the premises; and c pay the costs of suit. On January 30 2008 respondent appeal to the RTC was dismissed for their failure to file a memorandum on appeal as required under Section 7 b Rule 40 of the Rules of Court Rules . Their motion for reconsideration was similarly denied in an Order dated April 23 2008. Only Sabandal-Herzenstiel elevated the matter before the CA via a petition for review under Rule 42 of the Rules. The CA RulingOn January 11 2011 the CA rendered the assailed Decision nullifying and setting aside the rulings of both the MCTC and RTC and declaring Sabandal-Herzenstiel as the lawful possessor of the subject property. On the merits the CA found petitioner to have failed to establish prior possession of the subject property and rebut respondent claim of continued physical possession in spite of the sale of the subject property to Tri-Island during which Sabandal-Herzenstiel leased and converted the property into a resort. Petitioner moved for reconsideration which was however denied in a Resolution dated April 14 2011. Hence the instant petition.