FACTS:
877 Phil. 1002 SECOND DIVISION No. 248264. July 27 2020 The Issue Before the Court The issue for the Court resolution is whether or not the CA correctly dismissed petitioner appeal based on procedural grounds. The Court Ruling The petition is meritorious.

ISSUES:
WHEREFORE the petition is GRANTED. The Resolutions dated February 7 2019 and July 8 2019 of the Court of Appeals CA in CA-CR-HC No. 09062 are hereby REVERSED and SET ASIDE and the Entry of Judgment dated March 15 2018 is RECALLED. The case is REMANDED to the CA for resolution of the appeal on its merits. Petitioner is DIRECTED to file her appellant brief therewith within a non-extendible period of thirty 30 days from receipt of this Decision.

RULINGS:
FREDIEROSE TAMBOA Y LADAY PETITIONER VS. PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES RESPONDENT. DECISION PERLAS-BERNABE : Assailed in this petition for review on certiorari are the Resolutions dated February 7 2019 and July 8 2019 of the Court of Appeals CA in CA-CR-HC No. 09062 which denied the motion of petitioner Fredierose Tamboa y Laday petitioner to recall entry of judgment and to reinstate her appeal seeking review of the Judgment dated January 24 2017 of the Regional Trial Court of Sanchez Mira Cagayan Branch 12 RTC in Criminal Case No. 3712-S-5 finding her guilty beyond reasonable doubt of violation of Section 5 Article II of Republic Act No. RA 9165 otherwise known as the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002. The Facts The instant case stemmed from an Information filed before the RTC charging petitioner with the crime of Illegal Sale of Dangerous Drugs defined and penalized under Section 5 Article II of RA 9165. The prosecution alleged that in the morning of June 10 2015 acting on information received from a confidential informant members of the Philippine National Police PNP stationed in Claveria Cagayan successfully conducted a buy-bust operation against petitioner at an area fronting the Iglesia ni Cristo Church in Centro Uno Claveria Cagayan during which a heat-sealed plastic sachet containing 137 gram of white crystalline substance was recovered from the latter possession. The police officers then brought petitioner to the Claveria Police Station where they marked inventoried and photographed the seized item. Thereafter the item was forwarded to the PNP Crime Laboratory at the Regional Command 2 Camp Adduru Tuguegarao City Cagayan and after examination its contents tested positive for methamphetamine hydrochloride or shabu a dangerous drug. In defense petitioner denied the accusations against her claiming instead that at the time of the alleged incident she was riding her motorcycle near Centro Uno Claveria Cagayan when a tricycle with three 3 men on board hit her vehicle causing her to fall on the ground. The men then arrested her without just cause and falsely made it appear that she was peddling illegal drugs. On March 15 2018 the RTC Decision became final and executory and in a Resolution dated August 3 2018 the CA ordered the issuance of an Entry of Judgment. On October 25 2018 the Public Attorney Office – Special and Appealed Cases Service on behalf of petitioner filed an Entry of Appearance with Motion to Recall the Entry of Judgment and Reinstate the Accused-Appellant Appeal. Petitioner prayed for the relaxation of procedural rules and for her appeal to be reinstated and given due course explaining that the failure to file an appellant brief was due to the gross negligence of her previous counsel Atty. Amelito Ruiz Atty. Ruiz who unjustifiably failed to file the said pleading despite repeatedly moving for extension of time to do so.