FACTS:
Accused-appellant and his co-accused, namely, Marvin Belmonte (Marvin), Enrile Gabay (Enrile), and Noel Baac (Noel) were charged with Robbery with Rape in an Information dated September 3, 2007 that reads: The prosecution evidence established that, in the evening of August 31, 2007, Hiroshi Emmanuel Zorilla (Hiroshi) celebrated his 17th birthday with his friends in the house of his aunt Teodora and uncle Robert Dela Cruz in Pasig City. When it was already 12:00 midnight, Jolly Pantaleon (Jolly), one of Hiroshi's friends who was present at the celebration, left the group to buy some beer from a nearby store. At the store, Jolly met Enrile, who asked him if he could join them in the drinking spree at Hiroshi's place. Enrile then helped Jolly carry the half case of beer and joined in the drinking spree at Hiroshi's house. At around 2:00 a.m. of September 1, 2007, Jolly left the group and was followed by Enrile, but the latter soon returned to the party and was accompanied by accused-appellant and his brother Marvin, and Noel. Armed with guns and a knife, the three men approached and suddenly boxed Enrile, then tied the hands of all the persons inside the house and ordered them to lie down on the floor as they took their personal belongings.
Meanwhile, the maids of spouses Teodora and Robert, namely, AAA and Rhea Brioso, were awakened inside their quarters by the presence of two men, later identified as accused-appellant and Noel. Upon Noel's order, AAA was left inside the room. Noel immediately locked the door, and at gunpoint, ordered AAA to remove her pants. He told AAA to lie down, then he inserted his penis into her vagina. Thereafter, Noel and Marvin entered the room of spouses Teodora and Robert through the window. Teodora was awakened and was surprised, hence, she shouted which prompted Robert to get up from bed. At gunpoint, Noel and Marvin ordered the spouses to lie on the bed while they searched the room; then they took away some pieces of jewelry, laptop, ATM card, cash amounting to PhP 6,700 and 23 pieces of Yen. 

ISSUES:
Whether or not accused-appellant’s guilt was proven beyond reasonable doubt.

RULINGS:
Accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte y Sumagit assails the Decision dated April 22, 2014 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CR-HC No. 05774, affirming his conviction for Robbery with Rape in Criminal Case No. 135982-H.  After trial, the RTC convicted accused-appellant, Marvin, and Enrile of the crime of Robbery with Rape. On appeal, the CA modified the trial court's decision as follows: Accused-appellant Enrile Gabay y Dela Torre is acquitted on ground of reasonable doubt Unless detained for some other lawful reasons, accused-appellant Enrile Gabay y Dela Torre is hereby ordered released immediately. Accused-appellant Marvin Belmonte is hereby found guilty beyond reasonable doubt of the crime of simple robbery and .is sentenced to suffer the penalty of imprisonment at 4 years and 2 months of prision correccional medium, as the minimum period, to 10 years of prision mayor maximum, as the maximum period. The conviction of accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte for robbery with rape is affirmed. The crime of Robbery with Rape is penalized under Article 294 of the Revised Penal Code (RPC), as amended by Section 9 of Republic Act No. 7659. Robbery with Rape is a special complex crime under Article 294 of the RPC. It contemplates a situation where the original intent of the accused was to take, with intent to gain, personal property belonging to another and rape is committed on the occasion thereof or as an accompanying crime. There is no basis to disturb the findings of the trial court as affirmed by the CA respecting accused-appellant's criminal culpability. It behooves Us to rule that the testimonies of prosecution witnesses, Teodora and Hiroshi, as to the foregoing, are sufficient and credible to sustain the conviction of accused-appellant. Here, the prosecution witnesses' positive identification of the accused-appellant as one of the malefactors in the robbery that took place on September 1, 2007 defeats accused-appellant's lone defense of alibi. Absent any showing of ill motive on the part of the witnesses, a categorical, consistent, and positive identification of the accused-appellant shall prevail over the latter's alibi and denial. Unless substantiated by clear and convincing proof, alibi and denial are negative, self-serving and undeserving of any weight in law. The evidence further show that, on the occasion of the robbery, AAA was raped. The RTC and the CA are correct in their appreciation that the original intent of the accused-appellant and his cohorts was to take, with intent to gain, the personal effects of their victims. Rape was committed on the occasion thereof or as an accompanying crime. The trial court correctly convicted accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte of the special complex crime of robbery with rape even if he did not rape AAA, as accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte had the opportunity but did not endeavor to stop accused Noel Baac from raping AAA. As stated above, once conspiracy is established between several accused in the commission of the crime of robbery, as in the present case, they would all be equally culpable for the rape committed by anyone of them on the occasion of the robbery, unless anyone of them proves that he endeavored to prevent the others from committing rape. WHEREFORE, the instant appeal is DISMISSED. The Decision of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CR-HC No. 05774 dated April 22, 2014, finding accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte GUILTY of the crime of Robbery with Rape is AFFIRMED with MODIFICATION in that the accused-appellant is ORDERED to pay AAA civil indemnity of PhP 100,000, moral damages of PhP 100,000, and exemplary damages of PhP 100,000. Interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum is imposed on all the damages awarded in this case from date of finality of this Decision until fully paid. The rest of the assailed CA Decision STANDS.