FACTS:
At around 12:00 pm of May 26, 2017, Baniqued met with Leonardo at Consuelo’s Restaurant in Lingayen, Pangasinan. Upon the instruction of Mayor Espino, she was accompanied by Municipal Administrator Amado Aquino and a policeman whom she simply knew as “Tuazon.” During the meeting, Leonardo reiterated his offer to help Mayor Espino. He showed Baniqued several documents, one of which was an “Evaluation Report.” After much prodding, Leonardo allowed her to take a picture of some of the documents to show the mayor. When asked how he could help the mayor, Leonardo answered that they could settle the case by providing PHP 150,000.00 to PHP 250,000.00 per allegation, or a total of at least PHP 1,350,000.00. Aghast at what transpired during the meeting, Mayor Espino told Baniqued that he will not deal with a crook. Baniqued relayed the message to Leonardo, but the latter was not at all discouraged. He remained persistent, and texted and called her everyday to settle the alleged case. Baniqued claimed that when Leonardo did not get a positive response from the mayor, he then mentioned that there were also cases filed against Representative Amado T. Espino, Jr. (Representative Espino). Irked by the incessant calls and text messages from Leonardo, and upon instruction of Representative Espino, Baniqued gave Leonardo the mobile phone number of Arturo V. Soriano (Soriano), provincial accountant of Pangasinan, and told him to call Soriano instead. On July 14, 2017, Soriano contended that he received a text message from mobile phone number +639422607018 requesting for a meeting. When he replied to the text message, a person called him up and introduced himself as Atty. Gani Nicolas, who turned out to be Isagani, and requested for a meeting to discuss a complaint which he claimed was filed against Mayor Espino and Representative Espino when the latter was still the governor of Pangasinan. Isagani claimed to know someone who can help get the cases dismissed. Thus, they agreed to meet at Star Plaza Hotel in Dagupan City at around 7:30 pm to discuss the complaints. When Soriano arrived at Star Plaza Hotel, a man went up to him and introduced himself as Isagani. They decided to transfer to Lenox Hotel and arrived there at around 8:00 pm After 20 minutes, another man arrived whom Isagani introduced as Atty. Leonardo Nicolas, later known as Leonardo. During their meeting, Leonardo introduced himself as a lawyer and an employee of the Office of the Ombudsman, and showed to him documents purporting to be three separate complaints against Mayor Espino and Representative Espino. According to Soriano, Leonardo asked for PHP 1 million per complaint, or a total of PHP 3 million, in exchange for facilitating the dismissal of the complaints. Sensing his surprise and apprehension, Leonardo assured Soriano that it was not his first time to have such kind of transaction, as he had in the past facilitated the dismissal of a complaint filed with the Office of the Ombudsman against a mayor in Pangasinan. Soriano replied that he would relay the message to Representative Espino. On July 16 and 18, 2017, Soriano received text messages from Leonardo following up on his demand. In a phone call on July 19, 2017, Leonardo informed Soriano that the complaints against Mayor Espino and Representative Espino would be docketed, and that Mayor Espino would be suspended. Soriano relayed this message to Representative Espino. Without wasting time, Representative Espino instructed Soriano and Baniqued to seek assistance from the National Bureau of Investigation and the Office of the Ombudsman so that appropriate action could be taken. After they came up with a plan to entrap Leonardo, Soriano texted the latter and set up a meeting with him on July 21, 2017 at 5:00 pm at the Capitol Resort Hotel, Capitol Compound, Pangasinan. Soriano, Baniqued, Agent Espino, and the other operatives arrived at the Capitol Resort Hotel at around 5:00 pm Agent Balba and the other operatives positioned themselves strategically inside the hotel. Seeing that Leonardo and Isagani were sitting at the hotel cafeteria, Soriano invited them to the function room. Once inside, Leonardo asked about the money by saying, “dala mo na?” to which Soriano responded, “eto na.” Soriano then asked about the order supposedly dismissing the complaint against Mayor Espino. After reading the “Evaluation Report” given to him by Leonardo which appeared to recommend the dismissal of the complaint against Mayor Espino and bear the approval of the Office of the Ombudsman officials, Soriano handed to Leonardo an envelope containing the money. As soon as Leonardo got hold of the envelope, Agent Espino opened the door of the function room to signify that the exchange had been made. The operatives quickly rushed inside and arrested Leonardo and Isagani. Among the items recovered were the marked money and the signed Evaluation Report. Leonardo and Isagani were then brought to the NBI Office in Manila for booking, fingerprinting and photographing, and the case was endorsed to the Office of the Ombudsman for inquest proceedings. Isagani denied his involvement in the crime charged. According to him, his relatives introduced Leonardo as a distant relative during a get-together he hosted on May 27, 2017 at his residence in Pangasinan. They started calling each other pinsan and exchanged numbers. At one point, Leonardo asked him if he personally knew Representative Espino and Mayor Espino. When he told Leonardo that he knew Representative Espino, the former asked him if he could introduce him, to which he replied that he will try. Leonardo then showed to him documents which appeared to be anonymous complaints against Mayor Espino. Isagani briefly glanced at the documents and advised Leonardo outright to refrain from handling cases involving officials from Pangasinan as it may create doubt on his integrity. He returned the documents to Leonardo and they continued drinking until 8:00 pm Shortly thereafter, when Isagani visited his wife at her office, Representative Espino asked him if he knew Leonardo. He replied that he recently learned that Leonardo was a distant relative. Subsequently, on July 14, 2017, between 6:30 am and 7:00 am, Isagani claimed that he received a call from Representative Espino informing him that Soriano and Leonardo will meet that evening, and requesting him to introduce Leonardo to Soriano. Representative Espino told Isagani that he will give him Soriano’s number and that will be his cue to call or text Soriano. When Representative Espino gave him Soriano’s number, he immediately sent Soriano a text message and introduced himself. They agreed to meet at the Star Plaza Hotel. Since the hotel was packed when they arrived, they decided to look for another hotel. He was the one who informed Leonardo that the venue of the meeting was changed to Lenox Hotel. When Leonardo arrived, he introduced him to Soriano and then they ordered food and drinks. Isagani denied participating in what was being discussed by Soriano and Leonardo. He claimed that he was busy eating his dinner while the two talked. He could not hear their conversation because they were discussing in a low voice and the sound of the hotel drowned their conversation. Jose D. Rivera and Purificacion M. Dela Cruz, the general manager and treasurer, respectively, of the Teachers Association of the Philippines Inc., confirmed that Isagani had a meeting with its officers scheduled on July 21, 2017, the venue of which was transferred to the Capitol Resort Hotel upon the request of the latter. As sole witness for himself, Leonardo asserted that he did not know Soriano, and the latter was the one who first contacted him. During the meeting set up by Soriano on July 14, 2017, Soriano asked him how the case against Representative Espino could be dismissed. He explained that the complaint pertained to an anonymous complaint he received sometime in May 2017 against Representative Espino. He admitted not preparing an intelligence report regarding the complaint and having it docketed. At the meeting held on July 21, 2017, Leonardo handed to Soriano a sample resolution of dismissal as requested by the latter in their previous meeting; and the latter then placed an envelope on top of the table in front of him. Immediately thereafter, National Bureau of Investigation operatives barged in and arrested him. He denied touching and peering through the contents of the envelope as claimed by the prosecution witnesses. Leonardo argued that what transpired on July 21, 2017 was not an entrapment operation but a frameup inasmuch as he never demanded money from Soriano at any time and he was not the one who set up the meeting on the said date. The Sandiganbayan found all the elements of direct bribery to have been sufficiently established given that: (a) both Leonardo and Isagani were shown to be public officials; (b) it was proven that Leonardo demanded and received an envelope containing PHP 3 million boodle money in a valid entrapment operation; (c) the money was shown to have been received in exchange for Leonardo’s assistance in facilitating the dismissal of the alleged cases against the Espinos; and (d) the promised act of facilitating the dismissal of the cases against the Espinos was shown to directly relate to the exercise of Leonardo’s functions as Associate Graft Investigation Officer III at the Office of the Ombudsman. In convicting Isagani, the Sandiganbayan held that he conspired with Leonardo in extorting money from the Espinos. There is no question that Isagani acted as a bridge between the Espinos and Leonardo. He introduced them to each other even if he already knew that there were already complaints received by Leonardo against the Espinos. Although the introduction was upon the request of Representative Espino, Isagani’s repeated presence in both the July 14 and July 21, 2017 meetings indicated a willing participation over the requested introduction. Undeterred, Leonardo and Isagani appealed to this Court. Isagani asseverated that he should be absolved of the charge for direct bribery given that the prosecution failed to prove his guilt beyond reasonable doubt. He pointed out that the affidavit of Representative Espino only mentioned Leonardo as the person who kept on following up on his offer to help the Espinos settle their alleged cases, while the affidavit of Baniqued never mentioned his involvement in the extortion case. On the other hand, the affidavit of Soriano only mentioned how he was introduced by him to Leonardo and his passive presence during the July 21, 2017 meeting. He was also mentioned by the operatives in their joint affidavit of arrest only as a part of the narration leading to the transaction that transpired on July 21, 2017, but not as a perpetrator of the crime charged. yung ibang allegations doon panyera alam ntin yun bilang mga abogado na khit ibinalik mo n yung pera sa gov’t, may undue injury prin. (Sent June 2, 2017) [Baniqued] Sorry, I can’t talk right now. (Sent June 6, 2017) [Leonardo] Gud pm Atty. Kmusta na po? (Sent June 6, 2017) [Leonardo] Gud pm Atty. Katapos plng nmin mag-usap ni Asst Ombudsman. Pinakiusap ko na ihold in abeyance nya muna yung PS ni Mayor Jumel. Sana Maconvince mo na sya Atty dis weekend. Thank u! (Sent June 8, 2017) [Baniqued] gdam. 15 lang po khapon. mamaya ko po sya mkkausap (Sent June 16, 2017) [Leonardo] Ok po. (Sent June 16, 2017) [Leonardo] Cge po Atty. Salamat. (Sent June 16, 2017) [Baniqued] gdam. tnk u. will relay po (Sent June 17, 2017) [Baniqued] gdam sir. Inform ko lang po kayo, may sakit po c cong. pinapasabi po nya, kung about money issues, c art na po muna kausapin nyo. tnk u po (Sent June 17, 2017) [Leonardo] Copy atty. Thank u & God bless. (Sent June 17, 2017) [Leonardo] Sir Art, Im on my way to Star Plaza … Papunta na rin po c Atty. Gani. C u der Sir. (Sent July 14, 2017) [Leonardo] Sir, medyo malalate po ako ng konti. Anyway, malapit n rin po c Atty Gani. (Sent July 14, 2017) [Leonardo] Copy po Sir. Isama ko prin po b c Atty. Gani? (Sent July 19, 2017) [Leonardo] Gud pm P. Accountant. Sir, on da way na po ako … (Sent July 21, 2017) While Leonardo’s act of facilitating the dismissal of the complaints was neither alleged nor proved to be violative of any penal law, the Sandiganbayan correctly ruled that his act is still punishable inasmuch as dismissing a criminal complaint or even recommending its dismissal, without regard to the facts and evidence, constitutes an unjust act falling within the purview of the second paragraph of Article 210 of the Revised Penal Code. Leonardo’s act of facilitating  the dismissal of the said  complaints relates to the  exercise of his functions. There is no question that Leonardo’s promised act of facilitating the dismissal of the three complaints filed against the Espinos relates to the exercise of his functions as Associate Graft Investigation Officer III. This is evident from his position description form which shows that part of his duties and responsibilities as Associate Graft Investigation Officer III is to evaluate criminal and administrative complaints referred to the Office of the Ombudsman and, thereafter, prepare an evaluation report thereto with his findings and recommendations for the signature of his superior. Leonardo’s capacity to recommend the further investigation of a complaint filed against a public official or its dismissal and termination in the discharge of his duties is made manifest in the May 26, 2017 document he showed to Baniqued before he received the PHP 3 million bribe, and the June 30, 2017 Evaluation Report he handed to Soriano after he received the bribe money. The pertinent portions of these documents are reproduced below: A: Well, Mr. Soriano reported to me that they saw each other and talked at the Star Plaza Hotel, and they transferred to another hotel, Lenox Hotel and they talked about this P3,000,000.00 supposedly to be paid to them. According to Arturo Soriano he was asking that to be paid on the 29th or 30th of the month. A: It was Atty. Isagani Nicolas. Actually it was reduced from P5,000,000.00. That was the result and according to him. A: Yes. Then suddenly he went there in that birthday party in Labrador and talked to them so that he will help us to reduce the amount. As he came back and reported to me that he was able to reduce it by P3,000,000.00

ISSUES:


RULINGS:
CONTRARY TO LAW. Isagani and Leonardo pleaded not guilty when arraigned. After pre-trial, trial on the merits ensued. This Court affirms the conviction of Leonardo, but acquits Isagani of the crime charged. Article 210. Direct Bribery. – Any public officer who shall agree to perform an act constituting a crime, in connection with the performance of his official duties, in consideration of any offer, promise, gift or present received by such officer, personally or through the mediation of another, shall suffer the penalty of prision mayor in its medium and maximum periods and a fine of not less than three times the value of the gift in addition to the penalty corresponding to the crime agreed upon, if the same shall have been committed. If the gift was accepted by the officer in consideration of the execution of an act which does not constitute a crime, and the officer executed said act, he shall suffer the same penalty provided in the preceding paragraph; and if said act shall not have been accomplished, the officer shall suffer the penalties of prision correccional, in its medium period and a fine of not less than twice the value of such gift. If the object for which the gift was received or promised was to make the public officer refrain from doing something which it was his official duty to do, he shall suffer the penalties of prision correccional in its maximum period to prison mayor in its minimum period and a fine of not less than three times the value of such gift. In addition to the penalties provided in the preceding paragraphs, the culprit shall suffer the penalty of special temporary disqualification. The provisions contained in the preceding paragraphs shall be made applicable to assessors, arbitrators, appraisal and claim commissioners, experts or any other persons performing public duties. To sustain a conviction for the crime of direct bribery, the following essential elements must be proved: (a) the offender is a public officer; (b) the offender accepts an offer or promise, or receives a gift or present, directly or through another; (c) such offer or promise was accepted, or gift or present was received, by the public officer, as a consideration for committing some crime, or executing an act which does not constitute a crime but the act must be unjust; or refraining from doing something which is his official duty to do; and (d) the crime or act which the offender agrees to perform or execute relates to the exercise of his functions as a public officer. There is no dispute that Leonardo is a public officer, having admitted that he was an Associate Graft Investigation Officer III of the Field Investigation Office of the Office of the Ombudsman at the time material to this case. 6. With regard Leonardo Nicolas, Jr., how did you come to know him? A: I received phone calls and exchanged text messages with him. I also met him personally at Consuelo’s Restaurant in Lingayen, Pangasinan, ma’am. 7. What were these communications and meeting with Leonardo Nicolas, Jr. about? 28. Who was with Leonardo Nicolas, Jr. at the time of the meeting at Consuelo’s? A: He was by himself, ma’am. 29. In paragraph 17, you stated that you asked what you should do. How did you ask the question? A: After showing us the documents, I asked the question, “paano ninyo kami matutulungan?“, ma’am. 30. What was his response to the question? 33. What case or cases were Leonardo Nicolas, Jr. referring to? A: He did not elaborate except to say that they were cases when he was still a “mambabatas“, ma’am. A: Candidly, I was getting irritated by his constant calls and text messages and it was really getting awkward because I had nothing more to say to him, ma’am. 35. Whose idea was it to refer Leonardo Nicolas, Jr. to Mr. Arturo Soriano? A: It was the idea of [Representative] Espino, ma’am. Soriano’s testimony corroborates Baniqued’s account and showed how Leonardo used the complaints against the representative to extort more money from the Espinos: 42. When you arrived at Lenox Hotel, what happened? A: After around 20 minutes, a man arrived whom Labor Arbiter Nicolas introduced as Atty. Leonardo Nicolas of the Office of the Ombudsman. 43. What transpired afterwards? 44. What happened during that meeting? 45. What else, if any, transpired during that meeting? A: Leonardo R. Nicolas, Jr. asked for P1 Million per complaint or a total of P3 Million and in exchange he will facilitate the dismissal of the complaints. (Emphasis supplied) Soriano, Baniqued, and Agent Espino categorically and convincingly testified that they met Leonardo and Isagani at the Capitol Resort Hotel at around 5:00 pm of July 21, 2017. When they were all seated inside the function room, Leonardo asked Soriano, “dala mo na?,” referring to the money he was demanding. Soriano responded, “eto na,” and then inquired about the document Leonardo promised. Leonardo then brought out an evaluation report. After reading the document, Soriano handed to him a light brown expandable envelope containing the marked money, which Leonardo opened slightly and he peered through its contents. Agent Espino then opened the door of the function room as the pre-arranged signal to signify the consummation of the transaction. Immediately thereafter, the National Bureau of Investigation agents arrested Leonardo and Isagani. The prosecution evidence likewise proved that Leonardo persistently demanded money in return for his assistance to get the complaints against the Espinos dismissed. The text messages exchanged between Leonardo and Baniqued, as well as Soriano, indubitably establish the dogged determination of Leonardo to get the Espinos take on his offer in exchange for bribe money. Screenshots of said exchanges are reproduced in toto: [Leonardo] Copy panyera. Likewise, yung naikwento ko rin sau na case nya nung mambabatas pa po sya… (Sent May 30, 2017) [Leonardo] OK panyera. (Sent May 30, 2017) [Baniqued] ongoing po mtg. (Sent May 30, 2017) [Leonardo] Good morning Atty. Kmusta po? (Sent May 31, 2017) [Leonardo] Ok Atty. Twagan nlng po kita myang hapon. Pasensya kc follow-up na po nila sa taas… Ingat. Tnx. (Sent May 31, 2017) [Baniqued] as of now, hindi pa po pumayag c mayor. reluctant sya to offer kc sabi nya wala po tlaga anomaly. am sari po (Sent May 31, 2017) After nmn nyan atty, Makakatulong ako s case ng father nya sa Sandiganbayan. Newly Appointed as Justice doon ang kasamahan ko na c Atty. Bayani Jacinto (Sent May 31, 2017) [Leonardo] Atty., nga pla kung ni Mayor hingian ko pa ng discount para lang hndi na po ito lumabas sa media & labasan ng PS si Mayor … (Sent June 1, 2017) [Leonardo] Gud pm Atty. Pwede po bng tumawag? (Sent June 2, 2017) 7. There is deemed no further meaningful action that can be taken on the anonymous complaint. The mentioned constraints cannot be a reason to allow the FF case to languish in our dockets. 8. Premises considered, it is recommended that the letter-complaint dated 03 May 2017 against Mayor Jumel Anthony I. Espino be considered CLOSED and TERMINATED. While We are convinced that Leonardo is guilty beyond reasonable doubt of direct bribery, this Court finds that the prosecution failed to prove that Isagani conspired with him in committing the said crime. In order to prove conspiracy, the following requisites must be established: “(1) two or more persons came to an agreement, (2) the agreement concerned the commission of a crime, and (3) the execution of the felony was decided upon. Once conspiracy is established, the act of one becomes the act of all.” In Rimando v. People, this Court succinctly defined conspiracy as follows: It is necessary that a conspirator should have performed some overt act as a direct or indirect contribution to the execution of the crime committed. The overt act may consist of active participation in the actual commission of the crime itself, or it may consist of moral assistance to his co-conspirators by being present at the commission of the crime or by exerting moral ascendancy over the other co-conspirators. Hence, the mere presence of an accused at the discussion of a conspiracy, even approval of it, without any active participation in the same, is not enough for purposes of conviction. In this case, it is unmistakable that accused Isagani acted as a bridge between the Espinos and accused Leonardo. He introduced Soriano and accused Leonardo despite knowing fully well that there were already complaints received by accused Leonardo against the Espinos. Although the introduction was upon the request of [Representative] Espino, his continued and repeated presence in both the July 14 and 21, 2017 meetings indicate a willing participation over and above the requested introduction. Indeed, his demeanor and actuations in these meetings lead the Court to believe of his knowing participation in the crime charged. Third. During the meeting at the Capitol Resort Hotel on July 21, 2017, after Baniqued told the waiter in jest: “do you have cash instead?” Accused Isagani said: “we should ask from Mr. Soriano.” Accused Isagani’s claims of ignorance and non-participation in the subject matter of the July 14 and 21, 2017 meetings are plainly unconvincing. Indeed, the evidence on record shows that he is no mere simpleton. His intelligence is borne out by his membership in the bar and occupation as a labor arbiter. He was undoubtedly aware of all that was being discussed and the consequences of his actions. As to his alibi, granting that he originally had a different engagement on July 21, 2017, he still chose to attend the meeting with accused Leonardo at Capitol Resort Hotel. In fact, he requested the TAPI officials for a change of venue of his previously scheduled meeting with them. Instead of the original venue, he asked them to meet him at the said hotel. Rather than exculpating accused Isagani, the Court finds that this only evinced his prioritization of, and commitment to, the meeting with accused Leonardo. (Citations omitted) The testimony of Baniqued evinces that only Leonardo contacted her and persistently pressured her to convince the Espinos to accept his offer for help. The testimony of Soriano likewise shows that it was Leonardo who demanded PHP 3 million for the dismissal of the said complaints during the July 14, 2017 meeting, and only he kept on following up on his demand for bribe money. Isagani’s statement after he introduced Leonardo to Soriano during the July 14, 2017 meeting, “O, kayo na’ng bahala dyan. Basta ako dito lang ako. Ikaw na bahala magpaliwanag kung ano yan,” does not at all confirm his involvement in the crime charged in light of the fact that Soriano himself testified that after Isagani introduced him to Leonardo in said meeting, Isagani no longer called him or sent him any text messages. If at all, his statement proves that his presence in the meeting was limited to getting the two acquainted with each other. Two. While Isagani had no more business attending the July 21, 2017 meeting since he had already introduced Leonardo and Soriano to each other during the July 14, 2017 meeting, his presence and prioritization of the July 21, 2017 meeting over his meeting with the Teachers Association of the Philippines Inc. officers is not sufficient to conclude that he is acting in concert with Leonardo in demanding and receiving bribe money from the Espinos. “Mere presence at the scene of the crime at the time of its commission is not, by itself, sufficient to establish conspiracy. To establish conspiracy, evidence of actual cooperation rather than mere cognizance or approval of an illegal act is required.” Here, there is a dearth of evidence that Isagani actually cooperated in the commission of the crime charged. In fact, Soriano admitted that the July 21, 2017 meeting was supposed to be only between him and Leonardo, and it was he who arranged the same. ATTY. VENGUA: A: We were talking with each other, sir. A: Actually sir when we arrived, the waiter came to take our order and he is offering us coffee or whatever. I said in jest, “do you have cash instead?” A: To the waiter sir but it was within the hearing of the Labor Arbiter and the Labor Arbiter said, “we should ask from Mr. Soriano”, sir. Q: What did he mean, if you know? That you should ask money from Mr. Soriano? A: No. I was talking to the waiter but it was within the hearing distance of the Labor Arbiter and I don’t know if it was in jest but he said, “Maybe we should ask Mr. Art Soriano for cash.” Q: Now you testified that you had some conversation with Atty. Isagani Nicolas during the time that you were inside the room particularly regarding the order from the waiter asking for your order and you said, “Pwede ba cash na lang?” A: Yes, ma’am. Q: And the response given to you by Atty. Isagani Nicolas was? A: That we should ask Art Soriano, ma’am. A: For the cash. JUSTICE QUIROZ: Excuse me. Excuse me.  Madam witness, in so far as those phrase that “Pwede ba cash na lang?” whatever, how was your conversation? Was it taken as a joke or a serious matter? WITNESS: As far as I am concerned, I was saying it in jest, Your Honors. WITNESS: Yes, Your Honors. Pros. Calalang: A: How can I answer that, I could not narrate “kung anung nangyari” because Atty. Nicolas according to Atty. Dindin Baniqued, he had known that Atty. Isagani Nicolas was a relative of this other Nicolas, Atty. Leonardo Nicolas. And so, I asked him if he could help something like that. A: Yes, Ma’am. A: He said he is willing to that. A: I think so. Q: After that particular incident that he told you he will talk to his cousin Atty. Leonardo Nicolas, what happened next? Q: This ‘he’ is Atty. Isagani Nicolas? A: He came to me and he told me that apparently there are already three (3) cases filed against me also. This is why, they are asking for three million (P3,000,000.00). Q: Who is asking for three million (P3,000,000.00)? Atty. Vengua: Your Honors please, may we just request the witness to refer to the specific person he mentions ‘he’ and we do not know whether he is referring to Atty. Leonardo Nicolas or Arbiter Nicolas or what. He is always said ‘it’s him’. So if the answer would be more specific. Witness: Precisely, it was specific already Your Honor because I was being asked, what did Isagani, that is why he told me that he was asking for three million (P3,000,000.00) for the case. A: I did not mind that I was so furious and then I just kept silent and I said ‘sige tingnan natin di ko kaya masyado malaki‘. Q: What happened, you said you waited. What happened after that waiting scene? A: After that, they were threatening words I understand, and in fact there was a time I talked to Atty. Isagani, and he told me ‘sir, mapilit sila baka masuspindi si Jumel’ something like that. And so I said, okay, Gani will you kindly refer to Art Soriano. That is where Arturo Soriano came into picture. Q: Why did you refer Atty. Isagani Nicolas to Arturo Soriano? A: First, I did not want this transaction to go on, like this with me, if there is a transaction, kung may mangyari. So I was made to buy time being the former police officer, I was trying to find how deep Isagani Nicolas was already in this stage. So, I was buying for time. A: So I would know their next move, and I know how deep, if really Atty. Isagani Nicolas is involved. A: Well, as I have said on July 14 they had an agreement to see each other Atty. Leonardo Nicolas and Arturo Soriano. So they met each other. A: I was not there, Ma’am. A: I was so mad, I was so angry simply because knowing Gani or Atty. Nicolas, I thought he can help me explain to that guy, he is asking that there must be no case like this because these are all fabricated cases. Why should I pay P3,000,000.00 for fabricated cases. That is why I was so furious. And so, that is the time already that I said the entrapment of these people. That is why it made me believe that Atty. Nicolas is already involved. A: To be honest with you I give the benefit of the doubt to Gani. I did not raise that in my Affidavit, as mentioned by the counsel, simply because I am giving the benefit of the doubt and why was he there. So, he must be involved. Atty. Vengua A: It was relayed to me by Atty. Nicolas also. Q: Did you ask Atty. Nicolas who was asking for the P5,000,000.00? A: I asked him. A: He told me that they were asking for P5,000,000.00. That is why he went there. Q: My question Mr. Witness is, who was asking for P5,000,000.00? Q: Did you inquire from Atty. Nicolas who was asking for P5,000,000.00? A: It was his cousin Leonardo Nicolas. Q: It was Leonardo Nicolas who was asking for P5,000,000.00? A: Yes, sir according to him. Q: According to Atty. Nicolas? Atty. Vengua: Q: What gave you the assumption that Atty. Nicolas was involved in this case? A: Well from the start- Actually from the time that I asked him and requested him to see what he can do about the case against my son. After that, about two weeks, I understand that I have already a case. When I first talked to Atty. Gani- and that was the first time we have met, it was only my son who has a case. That was the first time ‘na nag-usap kami‘ and we were talking. It was only my son who has a case and then while there was a time elapsed between May and June. So during those times that they knew that the communication was between Leonardo and Dindin, UNFINISHED/INTERRUPTED- Witness: (cont.) Atty. Baniqued, I was the one talking also with Gani regarding this. Because as I’ve said I did not attend to this specifically na so important like that, no I did not. And then suddenly, there was this case already nag text sila, they texted that even me already have three cases and I have also new cases filed with the Ombudsman. Atty. Vengua: I’m still waiting for the answer. Witness: The question was, yes, I assumed already by that time because they were first asking P1,350,000.00 for the cases of my son. Atty. Vengua: For ‘they,’ you are referring to Leonardo? Witness: I talked to Leonardo. So everything was relayed to him. A: Yes, sir. I could not answer your specific question because it should be narrated a little. A: During the first time when they told me that my son has a case. That was in the month of May. In June it became P5,000,000.00. A: Yes, because I have three cases also. Q: What is happening now Mr. Witness in using metaphorically, you are taking the messenger, the messenger being Atty. Nicolas who is telling you that Leonardo was demanding first P1,000,000.00, second, P3,000,000.00. You therefore assumed that since he is telling you this amount, he must be involved also. A: Metaphorically. The penalty of imprisonment imposed upon Leonardo must accordingly be modified. He is sentenced to suffer imprisonment of two years, 11 months and 10 days of prision correccional medium in its minimum period, as minimum, to three years, six months and 20 days of prision correccional medium in its medium period, as maximum. (1) Accused-appellant Leonardo Rosario Nicolas, Jr. is hereby found GUILTY beyond reasonable doubt of the crime of direct bribery defined and penalized under Article 210 of the Revised Penal Code. He is sentenced to suffer the penalty of two (2) years, eleven (11) months and ten (10) days of prision correccional medium in its minimum period, as minimum, to three (3) years, six (6) months and twenty (20) days of prision correccional medium in its medium period, as maximum; and is ORDERED to PAY a fine of PHP 6 million, with subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency, and special temporary disqualification from holding public office; and (2) Accused-appellant Isagani Laurence de Guzman Nicolas is hereby ACQUITTED of the crime charged against him for failure of the prosecution to prove his guilt beyond reasonable doubt.