FACTS:
Accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte y Sumagit assails the Decision dated April 22, 2014 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CR-HC No. 05774, affirming his conviction for Robbery with Rape in Criminal Case No. 135982-H. The trial of the case proceeded against the accused-appellant, his cohorts, Marvin and Enrile, who all pleaded not guilty to the crime charged. However, Noel remained at large. The prosecution evidence established that, in the evening of August 31, 2007, Hiroshi Emmanuel Zorilla (Hiroshi) celebrated his 17th birthday with his friends in the house of his aunt Teodora and uncle Robert Dela Cruz in Pasig City. When it was already 12:00 midnight, Jolly Pantaleon (Jolly), one of Hiroshi’s friends who was present at the celebration, left the group to buy some beer from a nearby store. At the store, Jolly met Enrile, who asked him if he could join them in the drinking spree at Hiroshi’s place. Enrile then helped Jolly carry the half case of beer and joined in the drinking spree at Hiroshi’s house. At around 2:00 a.m. of September 1, 2007, Jolly left the group and was followed by Enrile, but the latter soon returned to the party and was accompanied by accused-appellant and his brother Marvin, and Noel. Armed with guns and a knife, the three men approached and suddenly boxed Enrile, then tied the hands of all the persons inside the house and ordered them to lie down on the floor as they took their personal belongings. Meanwhile, the maids of spouses Teodora and Robert, namely, AAA and Rhea Brioso, were awakened inside their quarters by the presence of two men, later identified as accused-appellant and Noel. Upon Noel’s order, AAA was left inside the room. Noel immediately locked the door, and at gunpoint, ordered AAA to remove her pants. He told AAA to lie down, then he inserted his penis into her vagina. Thereafter, Noel and Marvin entered the room of spouses Teodora and Robert through the window. Teodora was awakened and was surprised, hence, she shouted which prompted Robert to get up from bed. At gunpoint, Noel and Marvin ordered the spouses to lie on the bed while they searched the room; then they took away some pieces of jewelry, laptop, ATM card, cash amounting to PhP 6,700 and 23 pieces of Yen. Teodora recognized the faces of Noel and Marvin since the room was illuminated by light coming from a lamp shade. For his part, Enrile, testified that, at around 1:00 a.m. of September 1, 2007, he and other bystanders were in front of a. bakery store, about four streets away from Hiroshi’s house when Jolly arrived to buy one and a half cases of beer. He helped Jolly carry the cases of beer upon the latter’s request, and when they arrived at Hiroshi’s house, he was asked to join in the drinking session. Thereafter, some men entered the house and suddenly ordered them to lie down on the floor and tied their hands. The men took away his jewelry and cellular phone. Accused-appellant and Marvin, on the other hand, proffered alibi and claimed that they were sleeping in their house when the alleged crime was committed. The trial court correctly convicted accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte of the special complex crime of robbery with rape even if he did not rape AAA, as accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte had the opportunity but did not endeavor to stop accused Noel Baac from raping AAA. x x x The accused’s failure to prevent his co-accused from committing rape despite an opportunity to do so made him liable for the rape committed. x x x. (Emphasis and underscoring ours) AAA’s testimony was straightforward, candid and consistent on material points detailing the bestial act of accused Noel Baac in ravishing her. Besides, her statement was corroborated by the medical certificate dated September 7, 2007 finding AAA’s genitals to have suffered from deep fresh laceration. No young and decent woman in her right mind especially of tender age as that of AAA who is 18 years old would concoct a story of defloration, allow the examination of her private parts and thereafter pervert herself by being subjected to a public trial, if she was not motivated solely by her desire to obtain justice for the wrong committed against her. On the face of the evidence against him, accused-appellant’s defense consisting merely of his bare allegation that he and his brother Marvin were at their house when the crime was committed does not persuade Us to rule in his favor. By their own admission, they live at 97 Eastbank Road, Kapitbahayan, Floodway, Sta. Lucia, Pasig City. It was easy for them to negotiate the distance between their house and the victims’ house. Their place of residence and the place where the crime was committed are both situated in Barangay Sta. Lucia, and the distance could be negotiated within 15 minutes.

ISSUES:
Whether or not accused-appellant’s guilt was proven beyond reasonable doubt. While the evidence directly points to Noel as AAA’s rapist, accused­ appellant did not prevent him from committing the lustful act despite an opportunity to do so.

RULINGS:
And on the occasion thereof said Noel Baac, by means of force, threats and intimidation and with the use of a gun, willfully, unlawfully, and feloniously, have carnal knowledge with AAA, against her will and consent, which is aggravated by the circumstances of nighttime and dwelling, to the damage and prejudice of the said victim. Contrary to law. WHEREFORE, the Court finds accused Marlon Belmonte y Sumagit, Marvin Belmonte y Sumagit, and Enrile Gabay y Dela Torre a.k.a. “Puno” guilty beyond reasonable doubt of the crime of Robbery with Rape and hereby sentences each of them to suffer the penalty of reclusion perpetua. The accused are also ordered to jointly and severally pay Hiroshi Emmanuel L. Zorilla the amount of P23,000.00, as actual damages; Spouses Teodora and Robert Dela Cruz, the amount of P132,150.00, as actual damages; and [AAA], the amount of P50,000.00, as civil indemnity and P50,000.00, as moral damages. (3) The conviction of accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte for robbery with rape is affirmed. He is sentenced to suffer the penalty of reclusion perpetua without eligibility for parole. He is also ordered to pay AAA Php75,000.00 as civil indemnity, Php75,000.00 as moral damages and Php30,000.00 as exemplary damages, plus interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum on all damages awarded from the date of finality of judgment. The appeal lacks merit. The crime of Robbery with Rape is penalized under Article 294 of the Revised Penal Code (RPC), as amended by Section 9 of Republic Act No. 7659. Robbery with Rape is a special complex crime under Article 294 of the RPC. It contemplates a situation where the original intent of the accused was to take, with intent to gain, personal property belonging to another and rape is committed on the occasion thereof or as an accompanying crime. In People v. Tamayo, the Court ruled that: For a conviction of the crime of robbery with rape to stand, it must be shown that the rape was committed by reason or on the occasion of a robbery and not the other way around. This special complex crime under Article 294 of the RPC contemplates a situation where the original intent of the accused was to take, with intent to gain, personal property belonging to another and rape is committed on the occasion thereof or as an accompanying crime. The evidence further show that, on the occasion of the robbery, AAA was raped. The RTC and the CA are correct in their appreciation that the original intent of the accused-appellant and his cohorts was to take, with intent to gain, the personal effects of their victims. Rape was committed on the occasion thereof or as an accompanying crime. Accused-appellant was implicated because he was positively identified as Noel’s companion inside the room where AAA and Rhea were soundly sleeping. The CA, affirming the RTC’s finding ruled, viz.: Pertinently, in People v. Verceles, et al., We held: In the course of the robbery, one of them, particularly Mamerto Soriano, succumbed to lustful desires and raped [the victim] while accused-appellants just stood outside the door and did nothing to prevent Mamerto Soriano. We have previously ruled that once conspiracy is established between two accused in the commission of the crime of robbery, they would be both equally culpable for the rape committed by one of them on the occasion of the robbery, unless any of them proves that he endeavored to prevent the other from committing the rape. The rule in this jurisdiction is that whenever a rape is committed as a consequence, or on the occasion of a robbery, all those who took part therein are liable as principals of the crime of robbery with rape, although not all of them took part in the rape. (Emphasis ours) As stated above, once conspiracy is established between several accused in the commission of the crime of robbery, as in the present case, they would all be equally culpable for the rape committed by anyone of them on the occasion of the robbery, unless anyone of them proves that he endeavored to prevent the others from committing rape. The immediately preceding condition is absent in this case. The factual finding of the trial court as affirmed by the CA is already irreversible holding that while accused-appellant did not rape AAA, he, however, did not endeavor to stop Noel despite an opportunity. The fact that AAA was raped cannot be over-emphasized. The CA made the following categorical findings: Ergo, his conviction is sustained. The CA correctly noted that the imposable penalty upon accused­-appellant should have been death considering that the aggravating circumstance of dwelling was alleged in the Information and proven. However, with the passage of R.A. No. 9346 prohibiting the imposition of the death penalty, the trial court correctly reduced the penalty of death to reclusion perpetua, without eligibility for parole. Clearly, the imposable penalty against accused-appellant is death. However, by reason of R.A. No. 9346 as stated above, the penalty was reduced to reclusion perpetua. In view hereof, the CA’s award of civil indemnity in the amount of PhP 75,000, moral damages in the amount of PhP 75,000, and exemplary damages in the amount of PhP 30,000 to AAA, must be modified pursuant to the guidelines laid down in People v. Jugueta, to wit: II. For Simple Rape/Qualified Rape: 1.1 Where the penalty imposed is Death but reduced to reclusion perpetua because of RA 9346: a. Civil indemnity – PhP 100,000.00 b. Moral damages – PhP 100,000.00 c. Exemplary damages – PhP 100,000.00 Accordingly, accused-appellant shall pay AAA civil indemnity of PhP 100,000, moral damages of PhP 100,000, and exemplary damages of PhP 100,000. The trial court correctly awarded actual damages suffered by Hiroshi Emmanuel L. Zorilla and spouses Teodora and Robert Dela Cruz in the amounts of P23,000.00 and P132,150.00, respectively, as they are duly supported by receipts. (Emphasis ours) Truly, actual damages to be compensable must be proven by clear evidence, as in this case. WHEREFORE, the instant appeal is DISMISSED. The Decision of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CR-HC No. 05774 dated April 22, 2014, finding accused-appellant Marlon Belmonte GUILTY of the crime of Robbery with Rape is AFFIRMED with MODIFICATION in that the accused-appellant is ORDERED to pay AAA civil indemnity of PhP 100,000, moral damages of PhP 100,000, and exemplary damages of PhP 100,000. Interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum is imposed on all the damages awarded in this case from date of finality of this Decision until fully paid. The rest of the assailed CA Decision STANDS.