FACTS:
In an information filed on 19 April 1966, Jose Simborio y Salonga was charged with the crime of murder for the fatal shooting of Avelino Concepcion, Jr. in the evening of 11 March 1966.  It was there alleged that the accused, in conspiracy with Marmolito Catelo y Rivera (alias Sonny Catelo) and others whose identity and whereabouts were unknown, shot Avelino Concepcion, Jr. with a gun, wounding the latter in the abdomen which directly and immediately caused his death (on 14 March 1966).  The offense was said to have been attended by the circumstances of premeditation, treachery, abuse of superior strength, and the use of motor vehicle. On 22 April 1966,   the accused filed a motion for his provisional release on bail, claiming that the evidence of his guilt was not strong and, considering his personal circumstances and social standing, there is no probability that he would flee. After the parties had filed their respective memoranda, the court, considering the fact that – “The prosecution admits that it was not.  Simborio who fired the gun and shot Concepcion but another suspect still at-large by the name of Sonny Catelo.  But the prosecution insists that Simborio was present, was the one who identified the victim, and was in fact holding the victim’s arm when the latter was fired upon.” Prosecution evidence as such does not meet the required standard of “strong evidence” to justify the denial of the accused’s right to bail.  Consequently, the petition was granted and the provisional release of the accused allowed on a bond for P20,000.00.  The Assistant City Fiscal filed the present petition, claiming that the respondent judge acted in grave abuse of discretion and with bias in issuing the aforementioned order.

ISSUES:
Petition for certiorari against the order of the Court of First Instance of Manila dated 13 May 1966 (in Criminal Case No. 82116) granting the petition for bail of therein accused Jose Simborio y Salonga on a P20,000.00 bond. Petitioner’s charge of grave abuse of discretion on the part of the respondent judge is premised on the allegation that the motion for bail was granted in disregard of the manifestation of the trial fiscal that he was introducing witnesses to amplify the exhibits already presented. Petition for certiorari against the order of the Court of First Instance of Manila dated 13 May 1966 (in Criminal Case No. 82116) granting the petition for bail of therein accused Jose Simborio y Salonga on a P20,000.00 bond. 

RULINGS:
It can not be denied that, under our regime of laws, and concomitant with the legal presumption of innocence before conviction, an accused is entitled to provisional liberty on bail, the only exception being when he is charged with a capital offense and the evidence of his guilt is strong. This protective attitude towards the sanctity of the liberty of a person notwithstanding, due process also demands that in the matter of bail the prosecution should be afforded full opportunity to present proof of the guilt of the accused. Thus, if it were true that the prosecution in this case was deprived of the right to present its evidence against the bail petition, or that the order granting such petition was issued upon incomplete evidence, then the issuance of the order would really constitute grave abuse of discretion that would call for the remedy of certiorari. There is record, however, that while the trial fiscal manifested his intention to introduce witnesses to amplify the exhibits already adduced by the prosecution, such manifestation was in effect withdrawn when he offered to submit the matter for resolution of the court on the evidence already presented, provided the accused would admit said exhibits which condition the accused accepted. The declarations constitute judicial admissions, which are allowed by the rules and are binding on the parties, by virtue of which the prosecution dispensed with the introduction of additional evidence and the defense waived the right to contest or dispute the veracity of the statements contained in the exhibits.  Clearly, it can not be claimed that there had been deprivation of the prosecution’s right to present all its evidence.  If the evidence already adduced turned out to be inadequate for purposes of denying the petition for bail, the prosecution can not lay the blame at anyone else’s door; it took the risk in resting its case on the exhibits already presented, which, in the lower court’s opinion, did not suffice. Neither is it correct to say that the respondent judge gave more credence to the alibi of the accused rather than to the statements made by the victim and an eyewitness to the incident, thereby showing bias in favor of the accused.  It must be remembered that the question raised for the determination of the lower court was not the guilt or innocence of the accused of the crime charged, but whether or not the evidence of his guilt is strong.  In taking cognizance of the fact that the statements of the victim and witness Sumalde, that the accused was present at the scene of the incident and even held the arm of the victim when the latter was shot at, is contradicted by the examination paper and the testimonies of the instructor and his assistant tending to establish the presence of the accused in school at the time when the shooting occurred, the respondent judge did not rule on the admissibility and probative value of said evidence.  It was merely held that with the issue of the whereabouts of the accused when the crime was committed having thus become contentious, the evidence of guilt of the accused (so far presented) can not be considered strong.