FACTS:
The following day, 17 November 1977, in Civil Case No. 112027, Judge Pedro Cenzon issued a restraining order prohibiting petitioner from reacquiring possession of the subject premises.  Petitioner filed a motion to lift the restraining order.  A hearing was thereafter conducted on said motion and Gonzales’ application for the issuance of a writ of preliminary injunction. c.  If the petitioner (Corazon Babao-­Gonzales) is now in physical possession of the premises in question, such physical possession is a mere interference or disturbance of the possession of the private respondent (Heirs of Eugenio Sevilla, Inc.) after he (sic) acquired it when the respondent sheriff delivered the premises to him (sic) in compliance with the writ of execution.  There is nothing to restrain.  There (sic) respondent City Court judge has already ordered execution of the judgment and the respondent sheriff has already carried out the order and placed the private respondent in possession of the premises in question. d.  The petitioner is herself a wrong doer when she interferred (sic) with the possession of the private respondent after it was given to him (sic) by the respondent sheriff. e.  The petitioner has failed to established (sic) a clear or positive right over the property in question.  Her socalled (sic) right is predicated on a contract of lease between herself and Jesus Co as the lessor-owner of the property.  But the ownership of Jesus Co on the property is based on a Deed of Sale by installment which the PC Crime Laboratory, Camp Crame, Quezon City, has declared to be a forgery.  Likewise, the very notary public who allegedly notarized this document it (sic) to be a fake.  In short, the right of the petitioner on (sic) the property in question is not in essee or ‘in being’ up to this hour. On 9 February 1978, petitioner herein filed a motion praying that Gonzales and her counsel be held guilty of indirect contempt and be ordered to vacate the Cinema Gigi.  Acting thereon, Judge Jose B. Herrera issued on 8 March 1978 an Order directing “Deputy Sheriff Jaime de Leon, who may avail himself (sic) of the assistance of any law enforcement agency, to eject the defendant Jesus A. Co and all other persons claiming right (sic) under him from the premises of Cine GIGI situated at Calle Sande St., Tondo, Manila, and to restore plaintiff to the possession thereof.” Her motion to reconsider the Order of Judge Pedro Cenzon in Civil Case No. 112027 of 25 January 1978 having been denied, herein private respondent Babao-Gonzales filed with the respondent Court on 25 May 1978 “a Petition for Review with Prayer for Preliminary Injunction and Damages,” docketed as C.A.-G.R. No. SP-07822-R.  In the said petition, private respondent claimed that she has a better right to possess the subject premises and prayed, inter alia, that a writ of preliminary mandatory injunction be issued to restore her to the possession of the questioned premises.  On 2 November 1978, the respondent Court rendered a decision setting aside the 25 January 1978 Order of Judge Pedro Cenzon and ordering Sheriff Jaime de Leon to restore respondent Corazon Babao-Gonzales to the possession of the questioned premises upon the filing of a bond to answer for any and all damages that may be suffered by petitioner corporation. In granting the petition, respondent Court relied on the following arguments: “We find merit in the instant petition.  In the first place, it is a fact that petitioner Corazon Babao Gonzales is not a sub-lessee of Jesus Altavano Co but a lessee in which case she cannot come under the term ‘persons claiming under him’.  Secondly, in the ejectment case (Civil Case No. 12235-CV), the defendant was Jesus A. Co only.  To enforce the judgment in said ejectment case against herein petitioner Corazon Babao Gonzales would indeed be violative of the constitutional provision regarding the due process clause.  Thirdly, the action to quiet title instituted by Jesus Altavao (sic) Co vs. Heirs of Eugenio Sevilla, Inc. (Civil Case No. 105465) is still pending trial before the Court of First Instance of Manila, Branch IX.  It was not within the competence of the City Court in the ejectment suit to say that the true owner of the property are the Heirs of Eugenio Sevilla, Inc. because the sale in favor of Jesus Altavano Co was a forgery.  This matter is within the competence and jurisdiction of the court of first instance and precisely that is the issue in said Civil Case 105465.  x x x We believe it would be more prudent to maintain the status quo of the parties and for the respondent sheriff and his duly authorized representatives and agents to desist from enforcing the writ of execution issued by the City Court of Manila in Civil Case No. 0-12235-CV against Corazon Babao Gonzales until the court of first instance has decided the action to quiet possession, ownership and possession of title.” Its motion for reconsideration of the above decision having been denied, petitioner filed the instant petition on 2 March 1979. On 9 March 1979, this Court required respondent to comment on the petition within ten (10) days from receipt of notice. This Court resolved to give due course to the petition and required both parties to submit their respective Memoranda simultaneously, which they complied with.

ISSUES:
On 2 March 1987, this Court required both parties to manifest whether they are still interested in prosecuting this case. Petitioner manifested on 30 March 1987 that it is still interested in prosecuting the case; it likewise informed this Court that Co’s appeal (C.A.-G.R. No. 67454-R) was dismissed by the respondent Court of Appeals on 5 May 1981, as “evidenced by the Court of Appeals’ entry of judgment dated 24 May 1981.” The dismissal was based on Co’s failure to file the record on appeal.

RULINGS:
“PREMISES CONSIDERED, the order of respondent Judge dated January 25, 1978 is SET ASIDE and respondent sheriff Jaime de Leon is hereby ordered to restore petitioner Corazon Babao Gonzales to the possession of the questioned premises No. 1265 Calle Sande, Tondo, Manila upon the filing by the latter of a bond in the amount of P10,000.00 for any and all damages which the Heirs of Eugenio Sevilla, Inc. may suffer. SO ORDERED.” The facts of the case are not disputed by the parties. During the pendency of the unlawful detainer case, particularly on 30 September 1977, Jesus A. Co filed an action “To Quite (sic) Possession, Ownership and Issuance of Title” against the petitioner in the then Court of First Instance (now Regional Trial Court) of Manila.  The case involved the same property abovementioned and was docketed as Civil Case No. 105465.  A motion to dismiss the complaint was filed by the petitioner. “x x x and any and all persons, if any, claiming under him or otherwise privies to him in the occupancy of the said premises referred to in the complaint to vacate the same immediately; x x x.” Defendant Jesus A. Co failed to appeal from this decision, thus resulting in its becoming final and executory.  On 3 November 1977, a writ of execution was issued by the City Court and served by special sheriff Jaime L. de Leon on the occupants of the property. On 15 November 1977, Corazon Babao-Gonzales, respondent herein, claiming to be a lessee of Jesus A. Co with respect to the subject premises, filed with the Court of First Instance of Manila a petition for “Declaratory Relief and to Vacate Judgment, Execution Order and Notice to Vacate, with Prayer for Preliminary Injunction,” against herein petitioner, Jaime de Leon, National Deputy Sheriff, and the Hon. Judge Gregorio Garcia, Presiding Judge of Branch I, City Court of Manila. The case was docketed as Civil Case No. 112027. On 16 November 1977, after ejecting all the occupants of Cinema Gigi, sheriff Jaime de Leon padlocked and closed the premises, delivering, at the same time, possession thereof to the petitioner. This petition is impressed with merit. Since the first two (2) issues have become moot and academic in view of the dismissal of Jesus Co’s appeal, C.A.-G.R. No. 67454-R, We shall focus our discussion on the third issue. Hence, even if respondent was not made a party in the unlawful detainer case, the judgment evicting Jesus Co is equally binding on her, contrary to her contention. WHEREFORE, the petition is GRANTED.  The assailed decision of the respondent Court of Appeals in C.A-G.R. SP-07822-R is hereby REVERSED and SET ASIDE and the Order of the trial court of 25 January 1978 in Civil Case No. 112027 is REINSTATED.