FACTS:
Before the Court is a petition for review on certiorari assailing the January 11, 2011 Decision and April 14, 2011 Resolution of the Court of Appeals, Cebu City (CA) in CA-G.R. SP No. 03888 which declared respondent Marcosa A. Sabandal-Herzenstiel (Sabandal-Herzenstiel) as the lawful possessor of Lot No. 2574, situated in Brgy. Basdiot, Moalboal, Cebu (subject property). Petitioner Philippine Tourism Authority (now Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Zone Authority) (petitioner) is the owner of the subject property and other parcels of land located in Brgy. Basdiot, Moalboal, Cebu since February 12, 1981 when it bought the same from Tri-Island Corporate Holdings, Inc. (Tri-Island). It had then been in actual, physical, continuous, and uninterrupted possession of the subject property and had declared the same for taxation purposes.  Sometime in 1997, however, respondents Pedro Tapales, Luis Tapales, Romeo Tapales (Tapaleses), and Sabandal-Herzenstiel (respondents) by force, strategy and stealth entered into the 2,940 square meter portion of the subject property, on which they proceeded to cut down some coconut trees, introduced improvements and fenced the area. Petitioner made demands to vacate, the last of which was through a letter dated January 5, 1998, which respondents ignored, prompting the filing of a forcible entry complaint against them before the 12th Municipal Circuit Trial Court of Moalboal-Alcantara-Badian-Alegria, Cebu (MCTC), docketed as Civil Case No. 118, on March 18, 1998. In their Answer with Counterclaim, the Tapaleses acknowledged that the subject property had already been sold by its administrator, Josefina Abrenica, to Tri-Island.  They, however, claimed that the sale was tainted with force and intimidation and hence void, including the subsequent transactions covering the same property.  Notwithstanding the sale, they remained in actual and physical possession of the subject property and even introduced improvements thereon. Consequently, absent any proof of prior possession on the part of petitioner, they claimed that the forcible entry complaint must necessarily be dismissed.

ISSUES:
The sole issue for the Court’s resolution is whether or not the respondents may be lawfully ejected from the subject property.

RULINGS:
In fine, the Court upholds the findings and conclusions of the MCTC, adjudging petitioner to be the lawful possessor of the subject property, square as they are with existing law and jurisprudence. Accordingly, the CA’s ruling on the merits must perforce be reversed and set aside. WHEREFORE, the petition is GRANTED. The January 11, 2011 Decision and April 14, 2011 Resolution of the Court of Appeals, Cebu City, in CA-G.R. SP No. 03888 are hereby REVERSED and SET ASIDE. The April 13, 2007 Decision of the 12th Municipal Circuit Trial Court of Moalboal-Alcantara-Badian-Alegria, Cebu in Civil Case No. 118 is REINSTATED.