FACTS:
Sometime in 2005, the Province of Cebu was chosen by former President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo to host the 12th Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Summit scheduled on December 10, 2006. To cater to the event, it decided to construct the Cebu International Convention Center (CICC or the project) at the New Mandaue Reclamation Area, Mandaue City, Cebu, which would serve as venue for the ASEAN Summit. Accordingly, the Province of Cebu conducted a public bidding for the project and, on February 22, 2006, WTCI emerged as the winning bidder for the construction of Phase I thereof which consists of the substructure of CICC. On July 26, 2006, after completing Phase I and receiving payment therefor, WTCI again won the bidding for Phase II of the project involving the adjacent works on CICC. As Phase II neared completion, the Province of Cebu caused WTCI to perform additional works on the project which included site development, and additional structural, architectural, electric, and plumbing works (additional works). Cognizant of the need to complete the project in time for the ASEAN Summit, and with the repeated assurances that it would be promptly paid, WTCI agreed to perform the additional works notwithstanding the lack of public bidding. In November 2006, weeks before the scheduled ASEAN Summit, WTCI completed the project, including the additional works and, accordingly, demanded payment therefor. The Province of Cebu, however, refused to pay, thereby prompting WTCI to send a Final Billing. In the letters dated March 20, 2007 and September 11, 2007, WTCI again reiterated its demand for payment, but the Province of Cebu still refused to pay. Thus, on January 22, 2008, WTCI filed a complaint for collection of sum of money before the RTC which was docketed as Civil Case No. CEB-34012.
 
ISSUES:
The issues for the resolution of the Court are: (a) whether or not the liability of the Province of Cebu is in the nature of a loan or forbearance of money; and (b) whether or not the interest due should be computed from the date of the filing of the complaint or from the time extrajudicial demand was made.

RULINGS:
Before this Court are consolidated petitions for review on certiorari assailing the Decision dated December 19, 2012 and the Resolution dated August 8, 2013 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CEB-CV No. 03791, which affirmed the Order dated September 22, 2009 of the Regional Trial Court of Cebu City, Branch 6 (RTC) in Civil Case No. CEB-34012 finding the Province of Cebu liable to pay WT Construction, Inc. (WTCI) the amount of P257,413,911.73, but reduced the legal interest rate imposable thereon from 12% to 6% per annum. In a Judgment dated May 20, 2009, the RTC ruled in favor of WTCI and ordered the Province of Cebu to pay the following amounts: (a) P263,263,261.41 representing the cost of the additional works, with legal interest at the rate of 12% per annum computed from the filing of the complaint on January 22, 2008 until fully paid; (b) P50,000.00 as attorney's fees; and (c) costs of suit. The Province of Cebu sought a reconsideration of the foregoing and argued that its valuation of the additional works was only P257,413,911.73. In an Order dated September 22, 2009, the RTC granted in part the motion for reconsideration and reduced the amount of actual damages from P263,263,261.41 to P257,413,911.73, in accordance with the cost standards for the year 2006 provided by the Commission on Audit (COA), the National Statistics Office (NSO), the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), and the Province of Cebu itself. In a Decision dated December 19, 2012, the CA affirmed the RTC's Order dated September 22, 2009 but reduced the interest rate to 6% per annum. It remarked that the issue of whether or not a contract existed between the parties for the additional works has been rendered immaterial in view of the admission by the Province of Cebu that it was liable for the amount of P257,413,911.73, and that it had paid the same to WTCI; hence, only the award of interest, attorney's fees, and costs of suit are at issue. In this regard, the CA pointed out that the reduction of the interest rate from 12% to 6% per annum is warranted given that the liability of the Province of Cebu did not arise from a loan or forbearance of money but from the non¬payment of services rendered by WTCI. On January 24, 2013, the Province of Cebu moved for reconsideration which was, however, denied by the CA in a Resolution dated August 8, 2013. WTCI, on the other hand, did not seek for a reconsideration of the CA's December 19, 2012 Decision but filed, on November 13, 2013, a petition for review on certiorari before this Court, docketed as G.R. No. 208984. On November 13, 2013, the Province of Cebu filed its own petition for review on certiorari before this Court, docketed as G.R. No. 209245. There is no question that the present case does not involve an obligation arising from a loan; what is at issue is whether the liability of the Province of Cebu involves a forbearance of money, based on WTCI's claim that it merely advanced the cost of the additional works. The term "forbearance," within the context of usury law, has been described as a contractual obligation of a lender or creditor to refrain, during a given period of time, from requiring the borrower or debtor to repay the loan or debt then due and payable. In Estores v. Supangan, the Court explained that forbearance of money, goods, or credit refers to arrangements other than loan agreements where a person acquiesces to the temporary use of his money, goods or credits pending the happening of certain events or fulfilment of certain conditions such that if these conditions are breached, the said person is entitled not only to the return of the principal amount given, but also to compensation for the use of his money equivalent to the legal interest since the use or deprivation of funds is akin to a loan. Applying the foregoing standards to the case at hand, the Court finds that the liability of the Province of Cebu to WTCI is not in the nature of a forbearance of money as it does not involve an acquiescence to the temporary use of WTCI's money, goods or credits. Rather, this case involves WTCI's performance of a particular service, i.e., the performance of additional works on CICC, consisting of site development, additional structural, architectural, plumbing, and electrical works thereon. When the obligation is breached, and it consists in the payment of a sum of money, i.e., a loan or forbearance of money, the interest due should be that which may have been stipulated in writing. Furthermore, the interest due shall itself earn legal interest from the time it is judicially demanded. In the absence of stipulation, the rate of interest shall be 12% per annum to be computed from default, i.e., from judicial or extrajudicial demand under and subject to the provisions of Article 1169 of the Civil Code. When an obligation, not constituting a loan or forbearance of money, is breached, an interest on the amount of damages awarded may be imposed at the discretion of the court at the rate of 6% per annum. No interest, however, shall be adjudged on unliquidated claims or damages except when or until the demand can be established with reasonable certainty. When the judgment of the court awarding a sum of money becomes final and executory, the rate of legal interest, whether the case falls under paragraph 1 or paragraph 2, above, shall be 12% per annum from such finality until its satisfaction, this interim period being deemed to be by then an equivalent to a forbearance of credit. The Court observes, however, that WTCI neither appealed from nor sought a reconsideration of the May 20, 2009 Judgment of the RTC which awarded interest to it computed from the time of the filing of the complaint on January 22, 2008. Accordingly, the RTC's determination of the interest's reckoning point had already become final as against WTCI since it was not one of the assigned errors considered on appeal. The Court is, therefore, constrained to uphold the rulings of the RTC and the CA that the legal interest shall be computed from the time of the filing of the complaint. Lastly, the Court agrees with the CA that the legal interest rate of 6% shall be imposed from the finality of the herein judgment until satisfaction thereof. This is in view of the principle that in the interim, the obligation assumes the nature of a forbearance of credit which, pursuant to Eastern Shipping Lines, Inc. as modified by Nacar, is subject to legal interest at the rate of 6% per annum.
WHEREFORE, the petitions are DENIED. The Decision dated December 19, 2012 and the Resolution dated August 8, 2013 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CEB-CV No. 03791 are hereby AFFIRMED.

