FACTS:
Accordingly, the Province of Cebu conducted a public bidding for the project and, on February 22, 2006, WTCI emerged as the winning bidder for the construction of Phase I thereof which consists of the substructure of CICC. On July 26, 2006, after completing Phase I and receiving payment therefor, WTCI again won the bidding for Phase II of the project involving the adjacent works on CICC. In the letters dated March 20, 2007 and September 11, 2007, WTCI again reiterated its demand for payment but the Province of Cebu still refused to pay. Thus, on January 22, 2008, WTCI filed a complaint for collection of sum of money before the RTC which was docketed as Civil Case No. CEB-34012.

ISSUES:
The issues for the resolution of the Court are: (a) whether or not the liability of the Province of Cebu is in the nature of a loan or forbearance of money; and (b) whether or not the interest due should be computed from the date of the filing of the complaint or from the time extrajudicial demand was made.

RULINGS:
Before this Court are consolidated petitions for review on certiorari assailing the Decision dated December 19, 2012 and the Resolution dated August 8, 2013 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CEB-CV No. 03791, which affirmed the Order dated September 22, 2009 of the Regional Trial Court of Cebu City, Branch 6 (RTC) in Civil Case No. CEB-34012 finding the Province of Cebu liable to pay WT Construction, Inc. (WTCI) the amount of P257,413,911.73, but reduced the legal interest rate imposable thereon from 12% to 6% per annum. WTCI, on the other hand, neither filed an appeal nor a motion for reconsideration of the May 20, 2009 Judgment of the RTC. Dissatisfied, the Province of Cebu appealed to the CA. In a Decision dated December 19, 2012, the CA affirmed the RTC’s Order dated September 22, 2009 but reduced the interest rate to 6% per annum. It remarked that the issue of whether or not a contract existed between the parties for the additional works has been rendered immaterial in view of the admission by the Province of Cebu that it was liable for the amount of P257,413,911.73, and that it had paid the same to WTCI; hence, only the award of interest, attorney’s fees, and costs of suit are at issue. In this regard, the CA pointed out that the reduction of the interest rate from 12% to 6% per annum is warranted given that the liability of the Province of Cebu did not arise from a loan or forbearance of money but from the non¬payment of services rendered by WTCI. Anent the award of attorney’s fees and costs of suit, the CA affirmed the same after finding that the Province of Cebu acted maliciously and in bad faith when it refused to pay the value of the additional works. On January 24, 2013, the Province of Cebu moved for reconsideration which was, however, denied by the CA in a Resolution dated August 8, 2013. WTCI, on the other hand, did not seek for a reconsideration of the CA’s December 19, 2012 Decision but filed, on November 13, 2013, a petition for review on certiorari before this Court, docketed as G.R. No. 208984. In said petition, WTCI maintained that the obligation is one for forbearance of money since its performance of the additional works was a mere financial accommodation to the Province of Cebu, thereby warranting the imposition of legal interest at the rate of 12% per annum, as originally decreed by the RTC. It further claimed that the interest should be computed from the date of extrajudicial demand, i.e., from the date of receipt of the Province of Cebu of its February 8 and 12, 2007 billing letters. On November 13, 2013, the Province of Cebu filed its own petition for review on certiorari before this Court, docketed as G.R. No. 209245. It contended that there was no perfected contract between the parties and that even if there was, the same is void for lack of public bidding as required under RA 9184. While it admitted paying P257,413,911.73 to WTCI, the Province of Cebu averred that it did so only under the principle of quantum meruit, adding too that it could not be held liable for interest, attorney’s fees, and costs of suit because there was no valid contract and that, at any rate, even if it wanted to pay WTCI sooner, it could not do so owing to the lack of documentation. In a Resolution dated December 4, 2013, the Court consolidated the present petitions. At the outset, it must be pointed out that a determination of whether or not there was a perfected oral contract between the Province of Cebu and WTCI is a question of fact which is beyond the scope of the Court’s power in a petition for review on certiorari, subject to certain exceptions which do not obtain in this case. It is a settled rule that questions of law may be brought before this Court on petition for review on certiorari under Rule 45 of the Rules of Court. This Court is not a trier of facts and factual findings of the RTC, when affirmed by the CA, as in this case, are entitled to great weight and respect by this Court and are deemed final and conclusive when supported by the evidence on record. Accordingly, the Court affirms the liability of the Province of Cebu to WTCI in the amount of P257,413,911.73 which corresponds to the value of the additional works. The Court now proceeds to determine the nature of the liability of the Province of Cebu to WTCI. The term “forbearance,” within the context of usury law, has been described as a contractual obligation of a lender or creditor to refrain, during a given period of time, from requiring the borrower or debtor to repay the loan or debt then due and payable. In Estores v. Supangan, the Court explained that forbearance of money, goods, or credit refers to arrangements other than loan agreements where a person acquiesces to the temporary use of his money, goods or credits pending the happening of certain events or fulfilment of certain conditions such that if these conditions are breached, the said person is entitled not only to the return of the principal amount given, but also to compensation for the use of his money equivalent to the legal interest since the use or deprivation of funds is akin to a loan. The foregoing guidelines have been updated in Nacar v. Gallery Frames (Nacar), pursuant to Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) Circular No. 799, series of 2013, which reduced the rate of legal interest for loans or transactions involving forbearance of money, goods, or credit from 12% to 6% per annum. Nevertheless, the rate of legal interest for obligations not constituting loans or forbearance such as the one subject of this case remains unchanged at 6% per annum. Coming now to the issue of whether the RTC and the CA erred in computing the interest due WTCI from the time of the filing of the complaint, the Court finds merit in WTCI’s argument that the same should be reckoned from the time WTCI made the extrajudicial demand for the payment of the principal, i.e., upon receipt of the Province of Cebu of WTCI’s February 8, 2007 and February 12, 2007 letters demanding payment for the additional structural and architectural works, and additional electrical and plumbing works, respectively. The Court observes, however, that WTCI neither appealed from nor sought a reconsideration of the May 20, 2009 Judgment of the RTC which awarded interest to it computed from the time of the filing of the complaint on January 22, 2008. Accordingly, the RTC’s determination of the interest’s reckoning point had already become final as against WTCI since it was not one of the assigned errors considered on appeal. It is settled that a decision becomes final as against a party who does not appeal the same. Consequently, the present petition of WTCI questioning the RTC’s determination on the reckoning point of the legal interest awarded can no longer be given due course. The Court is, therefore, constrained to uphold the rulings of the RTC and the CA that the legal interest shall be computed from the time of the filing of the complaint. Lastly, the Court agrees with the CA that the legal interest rate of 6% shall be imposed from the finality of the herein judgment until satisfaction thereof. This is in view of the principle that in the interim, the obligation assumes the nature of a forbearance of credit which, pursuant to Eastern Shipping Lines, Inc. as modified by Nacar, is subject to legal interest at the rate of 6% per annum.