FACTS:
Sometime in July 2010, AAA, who was then 11 years old, was called by Fianza to his house and thereupon, was asked to wash his clothes. After AAA was finished with the laundry, Fianza asked her to go with him to the kamalig. Thereat, they proceeded to the second floor where Fianza removed his pants and briefs, lied down, and ordered AAA to hold his penis and masturbate him. After ejaculating, Fianza put on his clothes, and gave P20.00 to AAA who, thereafter, went home.
On November 30, 2010, while AAA was home, Fianza called her to his house, and asked her to clean the same. After she was done sweeping the floor, they proceeded to the second floor of the kamalig. Thereat, Fianza again removed his pants and briefs, lied down, and ordered AAA to fondle his penis. After the deed, he gave P20.00 to AAA who, thereafter, went home.
After the second incident, AAA related the matter to her cousin, CCC, who, in turn, told BBB, AAA's mother, who reported the matter to the police.


ISSUES:
The essential issue for the Court's resolution is whether or not the CA correctly upheld Fianza's conviction.

RULINGS:
Assailed in this petition for review on certiorari are the Decision dated November 24, 2014 and the Resolution dated May 29, 2015 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CR No. 35293, which upheld the Decision dated September 6, 2012 of the Regional Trial Court of Tayug, Pangasinan, Branch 52 (RTC) in Criminal Case Nos. T-5144 and T-5145, finding petitioner Christopher Fianza a.k.a. "Topel" (Fianza) guilty beyond reasonable doubt of two (2) counts of violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of Republic Act No. (RA) 7610, otherwise known as the "Special Protection of Children Against Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act." In a Decision dated September 6, 2012, the RTC found Fianza guilty beyond reasonable doubt of two (2) counts of violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610, and sentenced him to suffer the penalty of imprisonment for an indeterminate period of twelve (12) years and one (1) day of reclusion temporal minimum, as minimum, to fourteen (14) years, eight (8) months and one (1) day of reclusion temporal medium, as maximum, and ordered him to pay AAA the amount of P30,000.00 as moral damages for each count. In a Decision dated November 24, 2014, the CA upheld Fianza's conviction for two (2) counts of violation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. At the outset, the Court deems it appropriate to correct the appellation of the crime with which Fianza was charged to Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC considering that the victim, AAA, was only 11 years old at the time of the incidents. In instances where the child subjected to sexual abuse through lascivious conduct is below twelve (12) years of age, the offender should be prosecuted under Article 336 of the RPC, but suffer the higher penalty of reclusion temporal in its medium period in accordance with Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610, which pertinently reads: Pursuant to the foregoing provision, before an accused can be convicted of child abuse through lascivious conduct on a minor below 12 years of age, the requisites for Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC must be met in addition to the requisites for sexual abuse thereunder. The elements of Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC are: (a) the offender commits any act of lasciviousness or lewdness; (b) the lascivious act is done under any of the following circumstances: (i) by using force or intimidation; (ii) when the offended party is deprived of reason or otherwise unconscious; or (iii) when the offended party is under twelve (12) years of age; and (c) the offended party is another person of either sex. On the other hand, sexual abuse, as defined under Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610 has three (3) elements: (a) the accused commits an act of sexual intercourse or lascivious conduct; (b) the said act is performed with a child exploited in prostitution or subjected to other sexual abuse; and (c) the child is below eighteen (18) years old. In the present case, the existence of all the elements of Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC, as well as the first and third elements of sexual abuse under Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610, remains undisputed. Records disclose that on two (2) occasions in July 2010 and on November 30, 2010, Fianza induced AAA, an 11-year-old minor, to hold his penis and masturbate him. The only point of dispute is with regard to the existence of the second element of sexual abuse, i.e., whether or not the lascivious conduct was performed on a child subjected to other sexual abuse. A child is deemed subjected to other sexual abuse when the child indulges in lascivious conduct under the coercion or influence of any adult. With the foregoing parameters considered, the Court finds that Fianza's acts were attended by coercion or influence within the contemplation of Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. It is undisputed that AAA was only 11 years old at the time of the incidents, hence, considered a child under the law. Case law states that a child, such as AAA in this case, is presumed to be incapable of giving rational consent to any lascivious act. Records likewise indicate that Fianza was about 35 years old at the time of the commission of the offense, or 24 years older than AAA, more or less. The age disparity between them clearly placed Fianza in a stronger position over AAA which enabled him to wield his will on the latter. However, Fianza assails his conviction for the prosecution's failure: (a) to specify in the Information in Criminal Case No. T-5144 the date of the commission of the offense; and (b) to indicate in the information in both cases that the complained acts were performed with a child exploited in prostitution or subjected to other sexual abuse in violation of his right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusations against him. Conformably with these provisions, when the date given in the complaint is not of the essence of the offense, it need not be proven as alleged; thus, the complaint will be sustained if the proof shows that the offense was committed at any date within the period of the statute of limitations and before the commencement of the action. In this case, Fianza had been fully apprised of the charges against him since the Informations stated the approximate date of the commission of the offense to be "sometime during the month of July 2010." It is likewise well-settled that it is sufficient that the acts or omissions constituting the offense be stated in the information in ordinary and concise language and not necessarily in the language used in the statute, albeit in terms sufficient to enable a person of common understanding to know what offense is being charged and for the court to pronounce judgment. In the instant case, the Informations not only referred to the specific section of RA 7610 that was violated, but also stated that: (a) AAA was an 11-year-old minor at the time of the offense; and (b) Fianza committed lascivious conduct by forcing AAA to masturbate his penis. The allegation that Fianza committed lascivious conduct by forcing AAA to masturbate his penis was sufficient to apprise him of the nature of the criminal act with which he was charged to enable him to prepare his defense. Accordingly, the Court finds the prosecution to have sufficiently established Fianza's guilt beyond reasonable doubt for Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the RPC in relation to Section 5 (b), Article III of RA 7610. WHEREFORE, the petition is DENIED. The Decision dated November 24, 2014 and the Resolution dated May 29, 2015 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CR No. 35293 are hereby SET ASIDE and a new one is entered finding petitioner Christopher Fianza a.k.a. "Topel" (Fianza) GUILTY beyond reasonable doubt of two (2) counts of Acts of Lasciviousness under Article 336 of the Revised Penal Code in relation to Section 5 (b), Article III of Republic Act No. 7610. Fianza is sentenced to suffer the penalty of imprisonment of twelve (12) years and one (1) day of reclusion temporal in its minimum period, as minimum, to fifteen (15) years, six (6) months, and twenty (20) days of reclusion temporal in its medium period, as maximum, and is ordered to pay AAA the amounts of P15,000.00 as fine, P20,000.00 as civil indemnity, and P15,000.00 as moral damages, for each count, plus legal interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the finality of this judgment until full payment.

